HAST
SAMUDRIKA SHASTRA

THE INDIAN SCIENCE OF HAND READING

By
K. C. SEN, M.A,, Ph.D.

Foreword by K. G. Saiyidain

'D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & CO. PRIVATE LTD
\ TREASURE, HOUSE OF FOOKS
i 210, Dr. D. Naoroji Road, Fort —_ Bombay 1.
PRINTED IN INDIA

1960 D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & CO. PRIVATE L

Printed by K. L. Bhargava at K. L. Bhargava & Co., Impression House,

G. D. Ambekar Marg, Bombay 31 and puhlished by R. J. Taraporevaia

for D. B. Taraporevala Sons & Co. Private Ltd.. 210, Dr. Dadabhai
Naorcji Road, Bombay 1.
FOREWORD

By
K. G. SAIYIDAIN, B.A.M. ED.

Secretary and Educational Adviser,
Ministry of Education, Government of India.

I have been asked by my old friend and school fellow,
Mr. K. C. Sen, to write a foreword to his book on Palmistry.
I have consented to do so after weeks of hesitation and diflid-
ence because I regard myself as entirely unqualified to write
on a subject about which I know next to nothing. Ultimately,
courtesy has overcome commendable discretion and here I am
doing something which I can imagine myself advising my
friends, under similar circumstances not to do! Only once
before have I allowed myself to be placed in a similar awkward
fosition and that was some years ago in Kashmir when my
riend, Fandit Brijlal Nehru (then Accountant General in the
*State) persuaded me, against my better judgment, to write an
introduction to his collection of poems in English. Only, I
have even less title to speak agout Palmistry than I had
about English Poetry! I hope this frank confession will dis-
arm likely critics who would be quite in order if they raised
their fine, supercilious eyebrows at this unwarranted act on
my part.

And yet it will be wrong to imagine that I or for that
matter, any one else—can be quite indifferent to this tascinat-
ing field of speculation. I do know of some people who reject
outright anything to do with Palmistry which they regard as
so much ‘bunkum. This attitude is just as irrational as the
credulous attitude which accepts as gespel truth anything that
the street vendor of Palmistry may offer. A scientific attitude
of mind should be ready to examine critically and without
prejudice any data or evidence that comes its way and it
should maintain a state of suspended judgment’ till the truth
or otherwise of a theory or a position is duly ®established.
Personally, 1 lold this position though, from the little that I
have read about it or the few contacts that I have had with
palmists, I am inclined to think that there is a good deal in
this ancient Art. (I do not know whether it ¢an be given the
status of a ‘science’ as some of its advocates claim tor it) I
have read some accounts of the wonderful predictions made
by Cheiro and seen the testimonials given to him by eminent
persons whose veracity cannot very well de doubted. I have
also had soine experience of predictions made to me and about
vi INDIAN PALMISTRY

‘me by certain personal friends who had studied Palmistry as
a fascinating hcﬁﬂ)y and not as a commercial ‘stunt.” I migh.
perhaps share a couple of these predictions with the readers
of this book. It was the end of December 1937 and I was
then Principal of the Training College at Aligarh where I had
been living for over ten years. I met a friend of mine at a
Conference and he offered to read my hand which I let him
do in a light-hearted spirit. He said many pleasing things
(which one usually expects from friends and, if one is sensible,
one does not take them seriously) and then towards the end
he remarked, “In about six months from now you will be
leaving Ahgarh and taking up another kind of administrative
post elsewhere which will give you a broader scope tor work.”
1 said (or possibly only thought to myself) that it was im-
possible as I had no intention of going elsewhere and had
settled down at Aligarh (so far as I knew) for good. In May
1938 I received an invitation from the Kashmir Government
to take over the Directorship of Education in the State and
next month I had joined the post! My friend, reading the
news in the papers, wired to me saying “Congratulations on
the fulfilment ()F my prophecy!” The other incident occurred
some years later when, guring a visit to Delhi, I came across
another friend who had also taken palmistry as a hobby. I.
said to him casually that I had been asked to join a deputation
which was going abroad shortly for a Conference. He looked
at my hand and said ‘No,” there is no such iundication in your
hand tor the next few months” I was rather amused and
said. "My hand may have failed to catch up with my pro-
gramme but 1 have actually received the invitation to go.”
He said, "1 do not know whether or not you will go but I can
ouly tell you about the indications as I find them in your hand.”

.. As it happened, quite unexpectedly, the schemc fell
through and I did not go! But that 1s not the eud of the
story. About a year later I ran into him again and instead
of shaking me by the hand he started, with the abscnt minded-
ness of an artist, to look at the lines and said, ‘Now, I notice
that yon are due to go abroad shortly with some delegation.”
1 had not been out of India for many, many years and there
was apparently no likelihood of my doing so in the near future.
Within six months, however. the Unesco was established and
I went to fts preparatory Conference in London (and later)
to the Paris Conference, this confirming his prediction. It
made me fecl that both the negative and the positive predic-
tions could nof be mere coincidences . . . I must alsn say, in
fairness, that, i the case of this very friend I have seen cer-
tain prophecies not coming true which seems to indicate that
it is idle to claim for this branch of knowledge the exactitude
of a science. I amr too much of an ‘activist and a believer
in the freedom of the human will to accept the position that
the line of the hard or the bumps in the head or the con-
FOREWORD vii

figuration of the face dctermine a man’s fate, that everything
is written, with tatal precision and detail, in a man’s Kismet
which unfolds itself relentlessly, irrespective of what he may
do or not do himself. But I can imaginc a deep undcr current
‘ot unity liuking up our mind and body, our intellect and our
physique so that they are all influgneed by our life current
as it Hows along its conrse. 1 cannot pretend that this state-
ment offers a very lucid or convincing explanation but did
I not start with saying that I should not be writing this
foreword?

Mr. Sen has devoted a life time ot study to this subject
and has read deeply and extensively into it. In this book,
he docs not oiler -anything like an original contribution of his
own but brings together the truit of earnest and devoted work
and those, wlho are interested in this fascinating subject, hovering
on the border of the mysterious and the unknown, will find
the book to he a fairly full and adequate guide. They will be
thankful to him tor placing at their disposal, in this com-
pilation, what would otherwise need a smail Library of spe-
cialized books beyond the rcach of most students.

One word mere! T would entreat readers not to pay any
‘attention 1o the unduly flattering things said about my hand
—a fact which makes me teel particularly awkward in ‘writing
this Foreword. The author has offered in this book many
good readings of character. TIs it not possible that, in this
particular instance, he may have becn led astray?

(K. G. SATYIDAIN)
CONTENIS

CHAPTER,

I
III
v

VI
VII
VIIL
X

v XI
v XIT
v XIII
v XIV
v XV

“ XVI
- XVII

XVIII
XIX
XX

FoREWORD
INTRODUCTION

CHEIROGNOMY OR THE SHAPE OF THE HANDS AND
FINGERS
FINGERS
FINGERS NAILS
Tne THuMB aAND ITS SECRETS
THE MoOuNTS
CHEIROMANCY
Ricer anp LEFT HaNDS .
PrinciPLES GOVERNING THE LINES
SIGNS AND THEIR INDICATIONS
Tive oN THE Hanp
ToE LINE oF LIFe
Tue LINE oF MaRs. THE Rxscmzs Or BRACEL):TS
TueE LINE oF HEALTH
THE LINE oF HEART
THE LINE oF HEAD
Tur. LINE oF FaTE
LINE OF SuN e
LINE OF MARRIAGE AND FamiLy
THE LINE OF CHILDREN
Tre LINE OF PARENTS .
Tur LiNe oF BROTHERS AND SISTERS
Trne [ave or FRiENbS AND ENEMIES
THE LINe oF GinpLE OF VENUS
Heavtnr aNp TuE HanD
PROFESSIONS AND THE HaND
ForTuNE AND THE HAND
PracTICAL PALMISTRY

Pace

77

84
94.
106
117
124
139
142
144
145
149
153
159
163
168
INTRODUCTION

In the dawn of the world’s history Aryan sages in India
discovered that it was possible to knqw the latent abilities and
motive powers, the faults and virtues of man from the marks
and signs to be found all over his body. To this science they
gave the name Semudrika Shastra. It is practised to this day
in India; and scholars and experts in this ancient land may
still be encountered, iuterpreting and forecasting human nature
and destiny by scrutinizing the forehead, face, hands, chest and
feet. It is a striking fact that the marks on the human hands
resemble those found on the soles of the feet. It will be re-
called that Lord Krishna, the Divine Avatar and Teacher of
India, bore marks and signs on the soles of his feet, as the
Science of Hand-reading (or Hasta Samudrike Shastra), develop-
ed by the savants of ancient India, is at special pains to point
out. ~ Palmistry, among the ancient Hindus, was regarded as a
branch of the comprehensive lore of Semudrika.

Western scholars today accept without question that India
.is indeed the home and irth-pﬁuce of scientific palmistry or
hand-reading. Cheiro, the renowned English author and palm-
ist, declares: “The intellectual power which was to makec such
observations speaks for itsclf; and yet it is to such a people that
we trace the origin of the study under consideration. With the
spread of the Hindu teachings into other lands do we trace the
sEread of the knowledge of palmistry. The Hindu Vedas are
the oldest scriptures that have been found; and, according to.
some authorities, they have been the foundation of even tlte
Greek schools of learning.”

How and when the ideas and doctrines of palmistry spread
out of India, and came to be practised in other countries is not
known. The fact remains, nevertheless, that this science was
studied and practised in all the civilized countries of the Ancient
World, including China, Tibet, Persia and Egypt. It flourished
in Grecce, where it found favour with those who are now
honoured in various fields of human learning, such as Aristotle,
Pliny, Paracelsus, Albertus Magnus, and the emperor Augustus.

Then came a period of neglect all the world® over due to
the jealousy of the early Christian Fathers over the sway of this
old-world science. For in medizval” Europe it was denounced
as sorcery and witchcraft, and no honourable and educated per-
son dared to study and practise it. It inevitably fell into the
hands of gypsies and such other ignorant people, who brought
it into disrepute. Despite numerous attempts at revival, it.did
not regain its former life and influence; not even in India, the
lands of its origin, where it was confined to a few leading
Brahuin families, who closely guarded their ancient lore. For
xli INDIAN PALMISTRY

.this reason many treasures in Sanskrit, at the present day, lie
buried and hidden, thanks to the selfish traditions of the Brah-
mins. Every attempt to rescue them from oblivion and irre-
trievable loss has failed; their guardians cannot be persuaded
with money or any other human means to part with their
treasures. It is well known that a Brahmin guru or teacher
does not impart instrucdon to anybody, except to carefully
chosen disciples, whom he binds with a solemn oath mnot to
{)eveal the teachings indiscriminately to any other fellow human
ey,

Neglected by the people who gave it birth, maligned, mis-
understood, and suppressed by European nations, hand reading
has persisted down the ages, in spite of unscrupulous charla-
tans; so much so that in the nineteenth century European
savants took to it seriously and proved that it was a genuine
science worthy of the attention of seekers of the highest kind
of knowledge. If palmistry today has an honoured place amon;
recognized sciences, it is owing to the good work of outstand-
ing practitioners, like D’Arpentigny, Desbarroles, Cheiro, Ben-
ham, Mrs. St. Hill, Mrs. Robinson, Count St. Germain, and
Mr. Noel Jaquin. These outstanding palmists have made it
what it is today, and to them we owe an immense debt of
gratitude.

It is surprising that palmistry as an exact science has not
developed in India to the extent it has in Europe and America.
This is mainly due to the fact that its exponents here, Brahmin
priests, do not keep abreast of modern research, and adhere to
antiquated rules and techniques, preserved in Slokas and Sutras
hoary with age. These have to be interpreted and illustrated
in the light of twentieth-century findings, when they will un-
doubtedly make valuable contributions to the science.

European scholars, we agree, are singnlarly proficient in
rcading character, mental and physical tendencies, possibilities
of a career, and the loves, joys and sorrows of man. They are
able to read correctly and forecast the future of one’s children,
brothers, sisters and parents. But there are invaluable rules
and methods, peculiar to and characteristic of Indian palmistry,
that have been altogether bypassed and ignored by them, for
example, the unusual marks and signs, such as those of the fish,
trident, canopy, conch, flag, balance, and various types of tri-
angles and squares. Their importance and significance in life
have not been adequately, recognized and stressed. In order
to make palmistry a complete and comprehensive science, it is
imperative to explain and include these aspects and iysteries
of human existente.

Is another bock on palmistry at all necessary, when standard
works in great numbers—by famous palmists, ancient and mo-
dem— are available? For my part, after exhausting the Eng-
lish literature on the ‘subject, I had to turn to the Sanskrit and
Hindi texts found in this country. And my impression is that
INTRODUCTION xiii

the Indian system appears to be in a better position to inter-
pret many complex and bafling aspects than’any other system
in the world. As an instance, I may refer to the signs of
greatness and eminence, fully treated of in our Hasta Samu-
rika, but completely overlooked by western palmistry. With
this in mind, I feel that a book that combines both Eastern and
Western methods of hand-reading would complete and round
off our knowledge of this subject and meet a long-felt need.
1 have freely consulted the standard works, such as: Brihad
Sanghita, Samudrika Chintamani, Brihad Samudrika Shastra,
Hasta Sanjivani, and Hindu Palmistry by P. Srinivas Mahadev
Pathak. These have been illustrated with readings of the hands
of well-known figures in world history. As far as possible, 1
have followed the Western style of treatment; but where neces-
sary, I have not hesitated to point out clearly in what wa
Indian palmists differ and diverge. Throughout this work,
have verified the theory of palmistry by actudl Indian hand-
readings. It is my experience that certain signs and marks
regarding marriage, love affairs, friendships, divorce and widow-
hood described by European writers, are absent from Indian
hands. I rarely came across the ,mark of divorce on the hands
of a Hindu. Friendship between a man and a woman is unusual
*in India; it is therefore not surprising that such marks are few
and far between. .

he Hindu school of palmistry calls the main lines by dif-
ferent names. For instance, the line of Heart is called the Ayu
Rekha or Line of Life, the line of Head the Matri Rekha or
Mother Line. The indications of the lines Fiven by Hindu
writers nevertheless resemble in broad principles the interpreta-.
tion of Western authors. If employed sensibly, a hand-reader
familiar with the methods of both schools wilr prove far more
successful than one equipped with those of one school alone.
Personally speaking, I find that the two systems are not neces-
sarily opposed, but complementary.

In my earlier studies I found it difficult to understand why
in the absence of clearly defined lines of Fate and Sun a person
could be rich and at the same time occupy a high and enviable
position in society. According to Cheiro and St. Germain, the
shape and type of the hand have to be borne in mind in order
to determine the social position of the subject, and the. lines
alone are not as important as it has been thought so far. Thus,
very wealthy persons had the Fate ahd.Sun lines dimly marked
simply because they set no store by their fortine, so that the
lines ‘indicating riches and success appear dim and indistinct.
Dissatisfied with this reading, I had recourse to the Hindu
school, and learnt that marks such as those of a Temple, Flag,
Canopy, Fish, etc., have also to be taken into account. Their
significance is revealed in Sanskrit verses oy slokas. I could not
at first identify them in practice. Hindu pundits were not of
much use, either. It is only after long years of close study and
xiv INDIAN PALMISTRY

swork that I have been able to locate and identify them on
human hands.

In this connection I should like to cite an intcresting expe-
rience of mine. In 1934 I was asked to read the palm o
young man of 22, a law graduate and the son of an ex-minister
of an Indian state. He was on the threshold of life, and he
was worried about his chances of admission into the Indian
police service. 1 noted that the lines of Fate and Sun were
conspicuously absent. Hence I could not predict success at his
examination. My position was decidedly awkward. If I said
he would do well, T should have been false to myself; and if 1
foretold failure, the young man would be upset and discouraged.
So I said that he had a fair chance, but much depended on
his own efforts. Actually I felt that his chances were slender,
and that the odds were heavily against success. Later on, I
learnt that he had come out quite successful. On referring to
my Hindu textbooks, I discovered that on his hand was the
mark of a temple, indicative of good social position and wealth.

In Benham’s Laws of Scientific Hand-Reading you will see
the imprint of the hands of William Jennings Bryan, a candidate
for the Presidentship of the U.S.A. I must say that a first glance,
through a magnifying glass, did not warrant the reading that
Bryan would amass a fantastic fortune and climb very high
socially. A closer study, however, revealed the mark of a temple
on his wrist, signifying great wealth and high status. This mark
I have seen on the hands of scores of wealthy and famous per-
sons, for example, Rabindranath Tagore, the great Indian poet.

The Hindu school again, mentions the sign of the Conch.
When it is present, it denotes a millionaire. I have seen on the
hands of a Hindu gentleman who in ten years could make a
million and attain a high place in society.

On another occasion, I had the chance of examining the
hands of the wife of a friend who was Postmaster-General of a
Eostu] circle in India. The lines of her hand were not clearly

efined or bold enough to foretell high social status. The line nf
Health was unfavourable, with hints of asthma. Despite these
indications, I was informed that she had six children—twn sons
and four daughters—a devoted and wealthy husband, well placed
and affluent.  According to the readings of the Western school,
it would have been difficult to foresee that, at an early date in
her life, she would obtain all that an Indian woman dreams of.

It is in cases like thisethat the Hindu school comes to our
help. A palmist, trained on Eastern lines, would have spotted
immediately the beautifully formed mark of Fish on her hand.
This symbol connotes high social position. wealth, children, a
long-lived and leving husband and successful and honourable
caréers for the sons and daaghters.

According to the Hindu school, if the little finger of Mer-
cury is evenly set on the palm and stands above the first or nail
phalange of the third finger, it is a mark of good fortune; its
INTRODUCTION xv

ossessor attracts money like a magnet. On the other hand, it
ow-set, it means that he will continuously be_ struggling against
monetary difficulties.

People with lines of children on the Marriage line, on the
Mount of Mercury, have, sometimes been found to be childless.
The Hindu school points® to other places on the palm where
children should be read. The one atsthe base of the thumb is
reliable at all times. A well-defined island or Yav points to
plentiful posterity, a generous number of sons and grandsons.
If the Yav is well-outlined, the sons will bring honour to their
parents.

According to the Hindu school, a hand heavily creased with
lines portends a miserable and worried life, lacking mental
peace. A heavily lined palm is by no means indicative of pover-
ty, as some palmists are inclined to think. For poverty is indi-
cated by a hand crude in form, with ugly, thick, mndft’:-shaped
fingers, from which lines are almost absent. On the hands of
peasants, unskilled labourers, and semi-skilled artisans, I have
generally found merely the three main lines of Head, Heart, and
Life, deficient in good quality and shape.

In this book I briefly and lucidly present the Hindu view-
point, after dilating on the thecties of the Western school. In
*the later chapters I have illustrated the principles of the Indian
system.

Is palmistry of any practical use? Mr. Noel Jaquin in The
Hand Speaks says: “My whole aim and object is to prove, or
rather enable you to prove for yourself. that the human hand
betrays both intimate psychological processes, and also the pre-
sence of disease in active and semi-active states. I have been
very impressed, as I am sure you will be, by the evidence of a*
parallel psychological defcct existing as the sequence of a phy-
siologica{) gefer;t, or being complementary to it in the physiolo-
gical sphere.” He goes on to say: “The hand gives a perfect
picture of the whole, with its relative strengths and inter-
actions. It gives that much-needed individual picture.”

Thus, we see that the hand can reveal our mental, moral
and physical tendencies and the intimate relation between the
hand and the sub-conscious mind through which we come into
contact with the Infinite intelligence tﬁat shapes our destiny.
This explains why the lines and signs undergo a,change in a
mysterious way due to the working of the mind, which acts
under the direction of the will and, what Hindu philosophers
refer to as Buddhi, the discriminative faculty. «

We are therefore of the opinion that the conscientious study
of palmistry can prove useful to physicians in’the treatment of
patients; to parents concerned about the future of their children;
to teachers planning programmes of instruction; and to rhen
and women who contemplate matrimony.,

Speaking as one who has been associated with educational
systems for over a quarter of a century, I have always felt that
XVi INDIAN PALMISTRY

it would be really advantageous if the hands of little children
‘could be read periodically by a teacher-palmist attached to the
school. Woulcf’ this be a move in the right direction? I think
it would. The powers that be do of course carry out psycholo-
gical and- intelligence tests, but not in all institutions, and cer-
tainly not on a nation-wide, systematic way. No one so far has
had the vision to see the usefulness of scientific palmistry in
keeping a regular record of the students, with a detailed analysis
of the latent tendencies as revealed by the marks on their
hands. As the resull of reading the hands of my pupils, I have
been able to obtain a better insight into their natures and cha-
racters. which was of material assistance to me as a teacher
and guide. I should strongly call the attention of Indian leaders
to the importance of palmistry in the field of education as a
definite means of drawing the best out of students.

Hence I advocate with conviction that Indian Universities
should introduce palmistry as a subject of study. This would
tend to popularize it, so that subsequently it could be made a
compulsory subject to be taught, with Child Psychology, to
FupiLteac ers in Normal Schools and University Training Col-
eges. This may sound novel and startling, but it is a fact that in
Ancient India the guru was at once priest, teacher, and palmist
or astrologer.

Trained teacher-palmists would be able to maintain a re-
cord and “analysis” of the marks on the palms of their pupils;
which would help them to understand them, and solve the
problem of “the difficult child”.

It might be objected that the study of hand-reading is
likely to foster suil()erstition among the students. This, in my
opinion, is only likely where the science is wrougly used.

Writers on palmistry stress the fact that hand-reading en-
ables them to forecast well in advance the state of health of
a person, as well as the state of mind that might be responsible
for it. These warnings could be used to avert much suffering.

In India, among the Hindus, parents become extremely
anxious about the future lot of their daughters, as soon as' they
attain puberty. The marriage of children here seems to be
the concern of the parent more than of the child. From this
solicitude has arisen the custom among caste Hindus to com-
pare the horpscopes of the husband-and-wife to-be, to see what
the stars foretell. As a professional palmist, I must say that
seldom have I read “domestic bliss,” the reason being, pro-
bably, that fewpeople ave happily mated. For, in numberless
cases, marriage is neither a union of hearts nor a union of
mentally compatible persons. In this direction palmistry can
render valuable assistance by providing a pair on the brink
of rharriage with a clear breakdown of their nature, health and
tendencies and facts ;about the futurg as revealed by the im-

rints of their hands. Thus, the suitability of the match can
e forecast with almost cent-per-cent certainty.
INTRODUCTION xvii
There is {et another aspect of hand-reading about which
opinion is likely to be divided, namely, the nature of free-will,®
and the extent to which human beings enjoy it. Man is the
architect of his destiny, according to some. The fatalists, on
the other hand, pin their faith to predestination, and insist
that what is pre-destined by God will surely come to pass.
For them it is natural to accept whgtever a palmist or astro-
loger can predict about a newly-born child. If their belief is
true, it is difficult to account for the deepening and fading
away of marks, as the ycars roll by. It has been noticed that
some lines react strongly to a change in life, and become
changed beyond recognition, or altogether disappear. For
example, a change in the mental condition of a person has
often been found to make the shadowy lines of Fate and Sun
on his hand deeper, or fainter. This would mean that our
present life and conduct is the result of what we bring with
us when we come into this world.

In this connection let me quote the great Indian law-giver,
Manu. “Success in all worldly affairs,” he says, “depends upon
the laws of destiny controlled by the actions of mortals in their
previous lives and the conduct of the individual; the decrees
of destiny are a mystery. We must therefore have recourse
.to means  which depend upon man.”

These words convey an important truth. In human affairs
free-will and predestination play their parts. By predestina-
tion I understand the conditions under which a person is born
and the sort of body he is equipped with by nature or God.
The accident of birth has played in the past, and continues
to play, a great part in the career of every human being. Some
of us are born to riches, with everything in our favour. Others
are born poor, with a never-do-well battle to be fought. At
the same time we know that man has surmounted adversity.
Physical limitations hold him back, but by dint of sheer will
power, he moves ever forward and upward. We infer from
this that under the influence of a strong will the lines of the
palm undergo changes corresponding to the altered life of the
person. How and under what laws such changes are wrought
on the hand it is not possible to say. It may, perhaps, be
hazarded that God stimulates the sub-conscious mind in con-
nection with the coming change, and because of the intimate
connection between the hand and the mind, imprints are
made or modified on the palm.

Is it possible for an astrologer on*palmist to forecast an
event, seeing that the element of free-will is like]y to cause
changes in the markings on the handP Pahmist authorities
answer variously. Desbarroles, the Frenchman, declared that
it is not possible to rcad the occurrence of events marked -on
the hands more than five years in advance.- But actually palm-
ists have been able to predict events rélating to accidents,
bereavements, and other fatalities as also happiness and suc-
S2
xvill INDIAN PALMISTRY

cess (suggested by hand-marks), which did come to pass at
‘ the specil time.” In many cases, the warning against dangers
and “don’ts” were carelessly unheeded.

On the other hand, palmists have been able to notice the
dimming line of Life growing deeper, while a broken one
rejoins. If they had foretold death, which the masters do not
permit, their forecast would not have come true. I myself could

redict several years in advance the shape of things to come.
gut there were cases in which my %redictions did not turn out
to be accurate, presumably either because of my own imper-
fect reading, or uncontrollable changes in the lines due to the
use of will power.

If the view of the Greek philosophers that Fate is above
Zeus, the Father of the Gods, is held, we would have to believe
that even incarnations of the Deity, like Shri Rama and Shri
Krishna fall under the law of Karma. Mysterious are the dec-
rees of destiny, as Manu has exclaimed. This being so, the
presence, appearance or disappearance, deepening or fadin;
of the lines and signs will for ever remain a closed book, an
no explanation will ever be possible. Further, it will also re-
main a mystery whether the hand-marks connoting_ distinction,
riches, and success are preseat at the outset, or whether they
develop as their possessors carve out destinies for themselves.
An answer could only be given if detailed records had been
taken and preserved. But this much can be said: the mark of
eminence and success has invariably been present at the time
of the hand-reading.

To me it does not seem quite accurate that palmists and
astrologers are in a position to foresee the entire course
humar existence. This kind of fore-knowledge would be divine;
hence our science can by no means claim infallibility. A palm-
ist should know his limitations. As for myself, I must state
that I have been successful to a large extent in forecasting the
salient events of a life. But I could never be definite as to the
exact span of a life—not that there are no clear rules govern-
ing correct conclusions in this matter but that is the one thing
above all else that Providence appears to have jealously hidden
from the ken of man. After the event, a reasonable explana-
tion of the fated dissolution of a_human body is afforded by
the palmist by referring to the fact that of all the lines on
the human hand the line of Health is the most changeable. It
varies with the life we are leading. Hence, at the time of
death, it takes on a .milignant, dangerous form presaging
dissolution.

The fixing of time on the hand with reference to events
is extremely difficult. Dilierent methods have been advocated.
A .good student of this book, however, should have no difficulty.
For this reason the predictive aspect of hand-reading cannot
be carelessly brushed aside. If it were, the science would lose
wmuch of its charm; as men in all walks of life, prince as well
INTRODUCTION xix

as pauper and celebrities like Annie Besant, Vivekananda, Lady.
Curzon and Napoleon have consulted palmists and astrologers.
For foreknowledge is an obsession (almost) with everyone, even
though it may turn out ill.

This book is divided ipto three parts. The first deals with
Cheirognomy; the second with Cheiromancy; and the third with
Practical Palmistry. In the last sectfon I have tried to give
short, clear readings of famous hands in order to illusirate un-
usual marks and signs like the Trident, Fish, Temple, Conch,
Flag, Triangles, and others referred to by the Hindu school of
hand-reading.

Besides, I have also included a pithy reading of some of
the characteristics of hands that came under my observation.
These will enable students to grasp the principles of hand-
reading as explained here, as well as my system of fixing time
from the hang, without a clear knowledge of which the study
and practice of palmistry becomes uninteresting and, to a great
extent, valueless.
CHAPTER 1

CHEIROGNOMY OR THE SHAPE OF THE HANDS AND
FINGERS »*

Of all the living things on earth man is the most complex;
and of his limbs the hands are the most wonderful. The hands
have been able to make the most wonderful machines; but
he himself could never invent a better and more useful thing
than his own hand. Close examination of the shape, signs,
marks and lines on the hand can reveal nature, health and
mental tendencies and destiny, as has been established by
modern writers. For the hand is the humble servant of the
brain, and there is an intimate connection between its centres
and the hand.

great diversity is found in the shapes of hands, which
have been classified under the following headings: square,
spatulate, conic, mixed, philosophic, psychic, and elementary.
These classes are marked off from one another by the shape of
the palm and the fingers and the knots on the joints. For
practical purposes this grouping does not ,yield reliable conclu-
sions, as no tf' e is found “pure” or “exact”. At times it is mis-
leading and iﬁely to confuse students. “Very rarely, if ever,”
says Noel Jacquin, the British palmist, “is there found a subject
possessing hands that entirely conform to any one of ‘'these
types. Man is a complex animal, often a tangled mass of appa-
rent contradictions. ~The hand, therefore, often betrays thi¢
complex combination of varying traits.”

For the proper divination of character and disposition,
Cheirognomy is unequalled among occult sciences. The shape
of the hand and fingers is largely hereditary, but the lines and
signs on the palm are not transmitted through parents. In
real lifc we come across hands that are broad, short, large or
small, long and narrow, soft and flabby and hard.

Large hands belong to people who are fond of extremely
detailed work and are inclined to_go into the minytest details
of business. They have small handwriting, and pay close atten-
tion to the rules of etiquette, and are’easilv offended by even
the slightest lapses of courtesy.

A broad hand indicates a more balanced type of mind with
broad vision, commonsense, and love of activity not usually
encountered in any other type.

Small hands belong to people who write a large hand,
and are complacent by nature, broadminded and readily satis-
fied. “They prefer to carry out large ideas,” says Cheiro, “and
as a rule m&e plans far too large for their power of execu-
2 INDIAN PALMISTRY

tion. They love to manage large concerns and govern
communities.”

Long and narrow hands characterize “dreamers.” They are
not thorough-going and practical in their methods. They some-
times prove to be jacks of all trades and masters of none. It
has also been observed that thinness and length of the hand
makes a person self-centred. He feels out of place, isolated
from the mass of mankind, is shy and retiring Ey disposition.

The possessors of soft hands are g_le‘Eerally poetically
minded, imaginative and highly strung. ey are governed
by their senses. Hence a soft hand is more frequently a
woman’s hand. If it is flabby, the above characteristics are
magnified to danger point. It then becomes the hand of the
slothful, the pleasure-lover, the utterly selfish and heartless,
and naturally, the common thief and traitor. Its possessor has
a tongue and a brain ever active in evil ways. It is the hand
of the anarchist.

Hard-handed people are practical as a rule, lacking strong
xm:ginatian. They are frank and open, undemonstrative,
hard-working, firm and reliable, and remarkably courageous.

With the passage of time the hands become drier and less
suﬁaple. Hence we have to reckon with the age of the subject
when. we examine the consistency of the han%i. '

An extremely hard hand indicates lack of intelligence,
brltitnlity, and great indifference to others as well as to one’s
self.

The above is a summary of what Western palmists have
said about the hand in general. I have not described at length
what they teach about its shape. For information on this
‘point I can but refer the reader to the standard authors on
palmistry.

(II) The Palm

A thin, hard, skinny and narrow palm connotes timidity,
meanness, poor intellect, absence of passive or active energy,
and a nervous, worrying toubled nature.

A very thick palm, full and soft shows sensuality, gross
sensual instincts, excessive confidence and selfishness.

A thick palm with hardness of hand and short fingers in-
dicates a primitive hand. This is the hand of an unskilled
labourer, who is not expected to improve his lot. If this is
accompanied by a bad-loeking thumb, it is the hand of a brutal
criminal. 0 ' ’

A firm and, elastic palm is indicative of quickness of in-
tellect, equanimity of mind and energy.

. A very hollow palm signifies misfortune. As Cheiro says:
“Such people have .even more disappointments than fall as a
rule-to the lot of mortals.” This hollowness inclines more to
one line or portion of the hand than to another. If it is in-
CHEIROGNOMY OR THE SHAPE OF THE HANDS AND FINGERS 3

clined to the line of life, it foretells domestic troubles. If it .
leans towards the line of fate, it predicts misfortune in busi-
ness, money, and worldly affairs. If inclined towards the line
of head, some brain trouble is to be feared. When under the
line of heart, it indicates that there will be disappointment in

affectipns.

\/Af:cording to Hindu palmists, the signs of good and praise-
worthy hands are ten in number, and are as follows: warm
to touch; coloured like the sky before dawn; if the fingers are
joined together, without leaving an opening, no light would’
pass through; bright hands, as if they are oii%d; full and thick;
medium-sized; copper-coloured nails; long-fingered; wide; no
sweat, i.e., always dry.

The hands of a rich man have long fingers and good-looking

Ims. If the hands of a woman appear as charming as a lotus-

ower, she is fortunate, and will lead a happy life. Women
with thin, skinny hands with protruding veins, with a network
of wrinkles, lines and signs are not destined to be happy.

According to Hindu palmists, a palm which is evenYy ba-
lanced, with round hollows, presages wealth. A raised, full
palm shows that the subject is charitable. A clearly hollow
palm means that the person will fose his patrimony. A palm
with a distinct hollow is a sign of poverty. Varahamihira says
th::l such a palm betrays a tendency to be hard-hearted and

itiless.

P When the mounts on a hand are normally developed, it is
not possible for a palm to have hollows. The truth is that a
palm which is evenly balanced is likely to have a round type
of hollow; and this is regarded as a favourable sign. Benham
supports_this view in Lews of Scientific Hand#eadir;ﬁ. The.
centre of the palm is called the Plain of Mars. When this area
is unusually hollow, a person lacks drive, dash and push. He
is of an easy-going disposition, and in worldly strugiles he is
easily discouraged. The Indian palmists regard the hollow as
a mark of indigence. A heavily lined palm signifies misery and
troubles in life, sometimes a short life. If there are very few
lines (see the hands of unskilled labourers), this is a sign of

poverty.
(III) Colour of the Palm
A red or pink-coldured palm is a sign of fortune. If the
colour is yellow, the subject is inclined to sexual irregularities,
illicit generally. A yellow po{’xﬁf to a bilious condition,
which is the cause of irrita 1!1?" ite and black palms in-
dicate poverty. Blue signifies the habitual use of intoxicants.
CHarTER 11
_ FINGERS

(a) Long Fingers and Their Indications. Fingers are
either long or short. Long-fingered persons are mostly found
in the uiper strata of society and engaged in intellectual call-
ings, snch as law, surgery, accountancy, electrical engineering,
etc. They love detail and accuracy even in trivial affairs. They
are apt to worry over trifles, and are easily ruffled by adverse
circumstances. 1f the hand is bad, the person is deceitful and

RASCETTE
Fic. 1.
MAP OF THE HAND ACCORDING TO WESTERN SCHOOL

[
FINGERS * 5

cowardly. Long fingers signify sensitiveness and culture. They,
are prevalent in members of professions requiring brainwork,
but not in those earning their livelihood by means of handi-
crafts. If the fingers are very long, they show virtues and vices
of an extreme character.

Frc. 2.
MAP OF THE HAND ACCORDING. TO HINDU ‘SCHOOL

(b) Short Fingers. Short fingerell persons are quick to
act, quick to grasp essential points and possess quick minds.
They are organizers; but, unless aided 'bﬁn long-fingered per-
sons, they are apt to overlook details. ey take things for
granted, and do not look at matters closely.” They are hasty
in their manner and assert their rights in a bluff, down-right
manner. Short fingers have been considered as signs of a lack
of culture and good breeding, and generally occur in families
6 ' INDIAN PALMISTRY

.engaged in handicrafts. Thick and short fingers indicate selfish-
ness and sometimes cruelty, if found on the hands of others
than labourers.

(¢) Knotty Fingers. For an accurate reading the actual
formation of the fingers should be carefully examined. There
are two recognizable types: knotted and smooth. People with
knotty fingers are throughout and have analytical minds. The
main points to study in fingers with knots are: symmetry, order
and punctuality. These characteristics combine to make a suc-
cessful, clever mechanic, architect, devoted and conscientious
scientist, and a just judge, who is not likely to be swayed by
his emotions. It is regarded as a sign of commonsense. If the

gers are heavily knotted, they make a person unimaginative,
ncapable of appreciating the beauties of poetry, art, music,
and literature. Such fingers are found in businessmen, absorbed
in their affairs, with their higher impulses dulled and blunted.
These characteristics are enhanced, if the fingers are long and
knotted. Knots on short fingers tend to control their quickness
and impulses, and render them rational and amenable to rea-
son. The fingers have sometimes only one joint developed
or knotted. The first joint is one that indicates order in ideas;
“4he second knot, order in material things; the third, order in
domestic matters. Each knot has a significance of its own,’
so that the fingers with the first knot developed are those of a
philosopher, possessing abundant intellectual power. This is
the sign of an author. If the second knot is duly developed,
we have the hands of a person who uses his mind to evolve
systems. This is present in the hands of merchants, book-
keepers, farmers, mechanics, and school-masters of the ordi-
nary type. The characteristics of finger knots should be read
together with other characteristics like the variety in tips of
the first phalange, etc.

(d) Smooth Fingers. While knots in fingers denote
powers of reflection and orderly ideas and actions, smooth
fingers are found on the hands of persons who are impulsive,
unsuccessful, hasty, thoughtless and ignorant of real facts. Their
first thought is generally the right one. Their guesses may be
correct, but they meet with failure if they start reasoning. Note
that any isolated observation will always be valueless whenever
an exact conclusion is required. Therefore attention is drawn
to the many relationshiYs that exist between these types of

fingers and this or that line or sign.

I do not propose to describe in detail all the aspects of
Cheirognomy treated by certain standard writers, In this connec-
tion I would recommend Benham’s Laws of Scientific Hand-
reading. )

. Fingers, classified according to the tips, are of four kinds:
E:mted. conical, squlre, spatulate. Very rarely have all the
gers been found to have the same kind of tips.” In such a case,
FINGERS 7

the rules applying to each type should be borne in mind while,
forming an estimate of the nature of a person’s character.

(e) Pointed Fingers. The rarest and finest hand of all is
the hand with pointed or psychic fingers, a well-shaped thumb,
and flexible fingers. Pointed fingers refer to hands of people
belonging to the ornamental rather than to the useful section
of society. They are poets, dreamerd, and philosophers who
dream wonderfu{ dreams of social regeneration, but are devoid
of the ability to do anything constructive. They find themselves
in this world, but do not feel themselves of this world. Such
fingers must have been those of rabid fanatics, early Christian
martyrs, monks, and mediaeval idealists and visionaries. Pointed
fingers connote intense self-absorption and renunciation. In India
“avatars like Lord Krishna have been shown as possessing long,
smooth-pointed fingers. If these signs are exaggerated, they are
unfavourable and bring misfortune. There is a lack of practical
application. For a poor man to marry a woman with pointed
fingers would spell certain disaster. His household would be
neglected, and his children unattended.

11

A B [ D
Fe. 8.
A. Finger with square tip and smooth joint.
B. Pointed tip and smooth joint,
C. Spatulate tip with knots.
D. Waist-like thumb.

(f) Conic Fingers. Here the fingers instead of gradually:
coming to a point without knots, from the first to tir: third
phalange, keep even in thickness up to the third and then assume
a semi-pointed cone or tip. They are thicker than the pointed
fingers, and so is the palm that accompanies them. These per-
sons, with conical fingers, will be driven by impulse and instinct
more than by reason, and the degree of strength as indicdited
me thumb will make t"‘.}'Aem industrious 'fr erwise. To this

of hands belong all those restless people who cannot remain
in one place or job tor a long time. ey are of excitable tem-
8 : INDIAN PALMISTRY

.peraments, sensitive, lovable, but inconstant in their affections.
f conical fingers are found on the hands of a woman, the hand,
according to St. Germain is one that is “par-excellence”. The
owners of such fingers and hands are attracted by all beautiful
things in art and nature. But he or she, as the case may be,
is a plaything of moods, and this fitfulness is the cause of failure
in married lite. If the fiagers are unusually conical and the
hand bad on the whole, lethargy, sensuality and incapacity to
concentrate are indicated. This makes for an unbalanced, futile
life.  On the hands ot rogues, thieves, vagabonds, crooks, the
fingers arc conical with the little finger of Mercury extremely
long and dominant. Such persons have never been known to be
straightforward, honcst characters,

(8) Square Tips. People with square finger-tips have their
first phalange square, not only on its upper face, but on all four
sides. The palm with the characteristic square tips is of medium
thickness and slightly hollow and firm. The thumb is large and
well-formed, and the first knot is also in evidence. Marked
characteristics of this hand are regularity, order, perseverance,
and foresight. It is the hand of a thorough businessman, more
practical than thoughtful, the hand of a mechanical, practical
person strictly adhering to usage and laws ruled by reason ra-
ther than by emotion, and of a truthful disposition. He is not
prepared to sacrifice respectability, is generous, but knows where
to place his charity. In short, square-fingered hands are the
sign of clever, capable persons, who succeed. If the fingers are
knotted, they incline to study and reason. Tip joints, if deve-
loped, will incline one to organization, invention and, in case
of absence of development of the lower joint, they may not be
dble to complete their inventions. Square tips also predict pro-
ficiency in sport.

(h) Spatulate Tips. Spatulate fingers are found on the
hands of persons who are energetic and active. They are com-
mon in the US.A. and Great Britain. Possessors of such hands
are dynamic. self-confident and lovers of outdoor life. Such
hands indicate a tendency to indulge in mechanical crafts and
agriculture as well.

Ancient feudal lords and warriors had this type of fingers.
Christian reformers and modern “progressives” and reactionaries
are characterized by such‘finger-tips.

(1) Mixed Types. In actual life, it is very rare to find any-
one on whose hands the fingers are uniformly of one tr'pe. Most
hands are made up of mixed types. The most usual combina-
tion is that where the first and fourth fingers are pointed or
conic and the third and second square or spatulate. Such peo-
ple will have some of the characteristics belonging to each type.
The palmist consequently has to discriminate wien reading a
hand by examining closely each finger-tip.
FINGERS 9
l4"hem'e are able artists on whose hands a well-developed,
Mount of Venus, with conical or pointed first and fourth, and
spatulate second and third fingers have been observed. The
pointed or conic type indicates artistic vision, love of colour, a
good ear for music, or the feeling for rhythm. If the little finger
is pointed or conical, the possessor has the ability to make im-
pressive speeches. The presence of square or spatulate tips on
the second and third fingers gives its possessor the ability to
realize his ideals and instincts. Short fingers, relative to the palm
and nails, makes a person a capable organizer, one who will not
rest until he has finished a job thoroughly. People with such
signs have been found to be severe taskmasters, especially if
the line of head is straight and turns up towards the Mount
of Mercury at the end.

If the hands are heavily knotted and have pointed fingers,
the possessors incline to be of a grasping nature. They are dis-
posed to be wasteful, as far as their own self is concerned, but
in case of their fellows, they are niggardly. Their house-mem-
bers are shabbily treated. These people are also extremely self-
centred.

Composers of music have the first and fourth fingers pointed,
and the second and third fingers spatulated. The first joint
*should be developed, and the Mount of Venus prominent. Hands
with spatulated and knotted fingers are inclined to be of a mecha-
nical, inventive turn of mind. People with pointed first and
fourth fingers and square second and third are likely to be poets,
provided smoothness of the fingers is evident.

Authors have their top joints developed irrespective of the
shape of the hands and fingers. g

The presence of pads on the inner porticn of the finger
tips are definite signs of a nature which is sensitively alive to
all that is beautiful and harmonious. If this sign is very pro-
minent, a sort of personal attraction or mesmeric power is
indicated.

The pads referred to just now, if found on the hands of a
doctor, nurse, or veterinary surgeon, are invaluable. Hence, it
has been seen that with these marks a firm hand, short fingers,
and a slightly curved little finger a clever surgeon or vet is
predicted. If there are transverse lines on the inner portion
of the second phalange of the thumb, there is present a strong
power of attraction. .

It is important for the student o note which finger domi-
nates in a F\and, as well as the dorhinant phalange in that
finger, as each finger has_three phalanges. ,The degree of
strength or otherwise of the finger should be judged by the
strength or weakness of the mount situated below it; for, if it
is overlooked, a correct judgment of the nature and character
of the possessor of the hand will not be possible. For example:
if, on the hand, the first finger, i.e., the finger of Jupiter, is
unusually long with a strong and developed Jupiter mount as
10 INDIAN PALMISTRY

,compared with other fingers, we should conclude that the finger

in question is the dominant one, and the subject would be a
Jupiterian in temper, nature and character. In such cases, the
finger is either nearly equal to the second or larger than the
third one. Having decided this point, one should next com-
pare the length of the dominant finger with the others, and
note the abnormal development of length of the phalanges of
other fingers as well. He may then conclude in what way the
dominant characteristics are modified by these signs. It must
be borme in mind that cumparative thickness, width, flatness
and length of phalanges should be noted, considered and
judged. An unusual thickness of a phalange is equivalent to
an uncommon length, but refers to greater strength of character
and will-power. A finger divided into three phalanges is read
thus: the first (nailed) denotes idealistic or mental tendencies;
the middle one, the reasoning and business capacity; and the
third, material or animal characteristics.

The Jupiter Finger and Its Phalanges. The first or index
finger is known as the finger of Jupiter. This denotes by its
length, width and development the degree of personal pride
and self-respect that is possessed. If it is longer or equal to the
second, this is a sign of an 'unusually ambitious person who
desires to rule and dominate the worlzi This was a mark pre-
sent on Napoleon’s hand. If it is long, it indicates a tendency
to rule, and is fnemll present in the hands of statesmen and
clergymen. If the hand is bad in other respects, it means great
vanity. If the finger is long, with a pointed tip, there is present
religious exaltation and superstition. If of the usual length,
but with a square tip, there is a tendency towards a constant
-quest for truth; but, if the tip is spatulated, then the person
will be attracted to new creeds. If the first phalange is long,
then a person has the intuitive faculty. If the second is long,
it indicates ambition and love of domination. If the third is
long, an autocratic, tyrannical spirit is indicated.

If the first phalange of the index finger is short in propor-
tion to the first phalange of the other fingers, it signiﬁzs that
the individual is nmumﬁy disposed to disregard religious duties
and obligations, and has_a poor opinion of them. e reason-
able an(;; the natural side will appeal to him first, and he is
not likely to be swept away by religious impulses, except under
uncommon circumstances. A ng first phalange can alone give
that sense and strength of, religious fervour which impels one
to surmount mean and worldly circumstances.

A well-proportioned first phalange of Jupiter, if pointed
and combined with a clear, well-marked line of head, endows
a person with a talent for languages and a desire and ability
to acquire foreign languages with the greatest of ease. A very
pointed first phalange:indicates superstition and mysticism, and
is met with in Indid among the Vaishnava devotees of Shri
Krishna, It is curious to note that the hands of racing men,
FINGERS 11

who have faith in lucky or unlucky omens, have this mark in
a prominent form. .

A comparatively long and large second phalange of the
finger of Jupiter coupled with a strong thumb and no adverse
sign on the hand to contradict it will enable its possessor ta
attain that status which he has always been coveting. Tke
Mount of Jupiter under this finger is»the mount indicative of
sociability, position, ambition, love of power, religion, and love
of nature.

When the third phalange of the finger dominates and is
coupled with a high mount of Jupiter, the subject will be ex-
cessively haughty. If the first phalange is also large, it indi-
cates the religious intolerance of the Inquisitors, Bloody Mary
and Aurangzeb.

The Saturn Finger. The second finger is called the finger
of Saturn and denotes the degree of reasoning ability, intelli-
ence, and seriousness of the subject. It is called the finger of
alance. If it is long and twisted, murderous instincts are in-
dicated. It is rarely long and pointed. If it were so, the
rson would be selfish. Generally, the tip of this finger has
een found squarish or spatulated. This indicates love of ani-
.mals, and understanding of art, literature, and music. If the
first phalange is long, a person is inclined to be sad and super-
stitious, and may sometimes have a tendency to commit suicide.
This sign, coupled with a long first phalange of the first finger,
denotes a nature having a firm belief in the doctrine of pre-
destination, and may go to produce a noble type willing to
sacrifice his all for the sake of a lost cause.

On the other hand, if this phalange is short, it indicates .
a septi: with regard to the supernatural, and one who is not
carried away by religious emotion. He will have a longing
to cling to life, and is not anxious to spoil his chances of
improving his lot, even if this can be done at the cost of others.
Religious considerations will occupy a secondary place with
him, when his own personal comfort and pleasure are
concerned.

The second phalange of Saturn, if comparatively long, de-
notes a love of agriculture and mechanical occupations, and
also a fondness for outdoor life. Farmers, gardeners, game-
keepers, land agents, mechanics, will have this phaldnge strongly
developed. Saturn rules the earth, and all that is in it. Miners
belong to the Saturnian , and geperally hgve this second
phalange powerfully developed.

A person whose dominant phalange is the third one is of
the earth, earthy. Unless he possesses a good finger of Jupiter
and other favourable signs on_the fpalm, he will never'be
able to be better than a mere clod of earth.

The Finger of Apolld, or the Ring Finger. The finger of
Apollo is very important and useful in gauging the tempera-
12 INDIAN PALMISTRY

.ment, abilities and inclinations of a subject. Apollo rules art,
music, painting, sculpture, literature, public life, and dramatic
talens of a high order. But we shall be mistaken if we were
to wholly rely on the A{)ollo finger to find out whether the sub-
ject can be a successful actor, painter, or musician, as many
other factors have to be examined ‘closely. This finger indi-
cates the artistic flair, & desire for wealth and honour, and
sometimes a vain love of ostentation in dress, jewellery, or
riches. When it is unusually long, reaching nearly to the nail
of the second ﬁnger, and sometimes equalling it in length, a
certain amount of rashness and gambling tendency are signi-
fied. The subject is apt to indulge in speculation. If pos-
sessed of a weak will, he will risk everything, even life, for the
sake of chance.

If this finger is pointed at the tip when other fingers are
not of this type, the person is frivolous. If it is square at the
tip, the person will pursue art for the sake of the money he
can make out of it. If spatulated, a certain dramatic talent
of a high order is indicated.

If the first phalange is long, the person has artistic inspira-
tion. If the second is prominent and long, he is industrious.
With a long and broad tgird phalange, one is very likely to turn
artistic talent to money. Such a person is vain and given to.
ostentation.

If the finger is as long as the first, the person is moved
by an intense passion for fame and wealth.

When the third finger is dominant, he is a true Apollonian,
ruled by a sunny nature. If the finger is as long as the second,
optimism will characterize the subject, impelling him to diverse
kinds of speculation. But signs and marks of strong will and
wary disposition, if present will keep him from becoming a
foolhardy gambler. Examine the thumb and the lines of head
and heart for these signs.

The Finger of Mercury. The fourth finger is the finger
of roanagement, and imparts strength to utilize abilities indi-
cated by thc head line. No person ever rose to distinction
without a long Mercury finger. With it, even a fool would
achieve success. That is why ancient Indian sages remarked
that if the little finger rises above the first joint of the Apollo
finger, it is ,a mark of good fortune.

The temperament can be found out lﬁ noting the forma-
tion and shape of the Mercury finger. e longer the little
finger, the Jonger the subject takes to forgive and forget. A
short finger of Mercury indicates a short temper; but such a
perscn is apt to Yorget quickly the cause of offence.

. A subject with a long first phalange of the little finger
has generally the gift of fluent speech and the power of swaying
his audience. If th¢ tip is pointed, he will have a keen sense
of the ridiculous, and will possess a power of mimicry. If the
fingers are supple, the line of head clear and deep, and the
FINGERS 13

first knot of the long little finger is well-d'evelolﬁed and long,
it signifies perseverance, industry, and commercial ability. This
sign is present on the hands of successful businessmen and
merchants.

A long third ghalange.is the sign of shrewdness. On a bad
hand cunning and untruthfulness are indicated. If the line of
head slopes to the mount of the Moon, it denotes a dishonest,
untruthful, cunning and deceitful nature.

If the little finger is nearly as long as the third, it is the
mark of a savant and philosopher. But, if the hand is bad,
a deceiver and cheat are indicated. Although rarely found, if
the little finger is as long as the second, this is indicative of the
fact that the subject possesses immense powers of self-denial
and sacrifice, enabling Eim to overcome all obstacles.

A curved little finger has been found in the hands of hospi-
tal nurses, and means that she is suited by nature for the
profession of her choice.

If the finger of Mercury is set low on the hand, it is a sure
sign that the person will have to struggle against monetary cir-
cumstances alfehis life. This is a certain indication of lack of
push and dash in the subject. If-coupled with absence of self-
-confidence, shown by the head line and weakness of will by the
thumb, it presents a huge stumbling block to a successful career.
But, if strength of will and self-confidence are in evidence, it is
a magnificent mark; for it assures that the person is unselfish
and gives him a nature that would scorn to use people and cir-
cumstances for his own personal advantage. This mark is
S:esent on the hands of humanitarians and saints rather than on

ose who live chiefly on the material plane.

Fingers on ¢ Line. In certain hands you will find the palm
arched at the top. This should not be regarded as an unfavour-
able sign, as it is encountered within a certain kind of thin,
long-fingered hand. The bad or unfavourable sign is when the
slope is all on one side. When the fingers of Mercury or Apollo
are set much lower than the other two, there is not much power
and capacity for carrying out one’s ideas. There is always a
hard strug%e, even when a clear head line is found. But, if, on
the other hand, the slope is reversed, the subject will be in-
capable of fair dealing and unable to realize high ideals despite
the presence of an excellent heart line and the mouht of Jupiter.
On the hand of great persons, the liﬁg:rs have been found set
on a line, and this gives an evenly balanced natyre and capacity
to deal with affairs of life in a successful manner.

Some More Important Observations Regarding Fingers. For
the benefit of the student it should be pointed out that the
fingers should be straight to express ability and capability indi-
cated by the lines and mounts of the hand. A twist of the
fingers should be distinguished from straightness; the effect of
illness should also be studied. It should be clearly borne in
14 INDIAN PALMISTRY

.mind that fingers to be good should be flat or squared, rather
than broad on the inside and round like a candle. ~ All the three
Fhalanges should be examined and differences in shape and

ormation observed. For people with candle-like fingers are
devoid of capacity because of impressionability, self-deception,
and disorderliness of mind and nature.

Fwi. 4
1. Wide space between the base of fingers and the Line of
Heart indicates general talents.
2. Fingers evenly set on the palm.

The fingers should always be more noticeable than the
i:alm of the hand. They shouft,i be long and large in proportion.
f this is the case, the character is more influenced by ability
rather than by emotions and ideals. The result is that excellent
acts would follow, and there would be no chance of their being
only dreamed of and never realized.

If the fingers turn up at the tips, they indicate avarice and
tenacity. If they turn back, the person is tenacious also. If they
curl up towards«the palm; it means that he is grasping by nature,
not only as far as money is concerned, but also in other matters.

Larger upper phalanges of the fingers denote constructive
ability. "This is a sign found on the hands of clever carpenters,
dressmakers, tailors, sculptors, etc.

Hollowed lower phalanges of the fingers are symptomatic of
shyness. This will vary in the two hands according to whether
the subject has mastered it or not, R
FINGERS 15

Thick lower phalanges indicate greed and love of eating. ,
If thick and wide, a heavy eater is foreshadowed. Good cool%s
can always be detected by the thickness of the lower phalanges.

If, on opening the palm upgermost, with the fingers held
close together, small spaces are observed at the base of the third
phalanges, they are si which show that a person is capable
of living on poor and hard fare, if necessary. To this class
belong explorers, mountaineers, and big game hunters.

Space between the Fingers. When the hand is thrown open
naturally, palm uppermost, if there is a large space between
thumb and the first finger, a person is large-hearted; between
the first and second fingers, an independent thinker; between the
second and third, original and eccentric; between the third and
fourth, independent in action and self-reliant.

Observations by Ancient Hindu Writers. According to an-
cient Hindu writers, .there are four fingers and one thumb, and,
if their number is more, this is considered an unfavourable sign,
denoting poverty, troubles, and short life (in some cases).

Fourteen types of fingers with their indications are des-
cribed. Straight fingers indicate a fortunate person. Straight
and long indicate long life. Thick and round indicate poverty.
Fingers bent outwards indicate soldiers. Short and flat fingers
indicate servants and labourers. Dry fingers indicate poverty
and are unfavourable and bad. Fingers with hair on the back,
unevenly made fingers, crocked fingers, very short fingers, very
thin fingers, fingers spread wide apart are indicative of poverty.
Fingers on the%mnds of a woman, if crooked, are considered a
sign of childlessness and widowhood.

A Few More Observations Regarding Individual Fingers:
If the Mercury finger touches the upper or nailed joint of the.
third finger, the subject will rise above the other members of his
family, and by dint of his own ability grow wealthy. Sometimes
there are gaps between the fingers, when they are held close
together. The absence of these gaps is a mark that the subject
will be wealthy; but their presence indicates that the person
will remain poor. If there are gaps betw een the third and fourth
fingers, he will be successful in middle life. If between the
second and first, he will be comfortable in youth. If the fingers
are entirely closed, it is a mark of wealth,

Hindu teachers have described very clearly signs found on
the toes of men and women. '

Small Toes on the Feet of Men. It the first small toe next
to the big toe is long, square and more beautiful than the latter,
the man enjoys a good 1ife. If it is short, there is trouble. If it
is equal in length, it is neither good nor bad. ¥f the second toe
is longer than the first toe, then the man is apt to lose his wife.
If it is equal to the first, it is a sign of luck. If the third to€ is
long, then he is given to study. II it is shogter than the second,
he is an adulterer. If the'first is thick and the fourth long, he
is happy and wealthy. If the fourth is short, thick and wide
16 INDIAN PALMISTRY

like a rod, the man is likely to lose his parents in boyhood. If
the second is abpormally long, the man is not honoured and his
work unappreciated. I{ the toes are short and widely spaced,
the person is a domestic servant. If they are equal in len,
and placed together, they are looked upon as good. Indications
of the toes resemble in some measure those of the fingers of
the hand. .

"Toes of Women. If the toes of women are soft, round,
fairly raised, and closely set together, they are looked upon as
good. I very thin, the indications are unfavourable. If short,
she will be short-hved. If the toes are crooked and broken, the
woman is of a deceiving nature. If flat, then she is a servant;
if wide apart, she will kill many masters and go to another. If,
when a woman walks, a cloud of dust is raised in consequence,
she will ruin three families. If the first toe of a woman is longer
than the big toe, she is self-willed, licentions, and will never
able to live happily with her husband and sooner or later will
leave him. If the second toe is longer than the big toe, the
woman is unusually unfortunate, and source of worry to others.
One should not marry such a woman. If the third toe of a
woman is short, she is inclined to be quarrelsome; when this toe
does not touch the ground while walking, she loses or kills two
husbands and goes in for a third. When the fourth toe does not
touch the ground while walking, a woman becomes a widow
and remarries. If the second toe does not touch the earth while
walking, after losing three husbands she will marry a fourth. If
the ltllu'rd and fourth are short, the woman will have no husband
at all.
CHAPTER II
FINGER NAILS

St. Germain, the well-known Frehch palmist, says: “The
modern physician, be he allogath, homeopath, or eclectic, has
long ago admitted that the colour, consistency, and heat of the
Ealm, as well as the form and thickness of the nail, are elements

e cannot afford to neglect when forming a diagnosis of any
patient’s state of health.” Besides, nails tﬁrow a%lood of light
on the temper possessed by a person. It goes without saying
that a good temper is the most important teature in a person’s
character. This may refer to four factors: anger, cheerfulness,
self-confidence and -vindictiveness. While discussing nails, we
shall see what has been learnt about these characteristics from
an examination of the nails.

Nails and Health. As far as the science of cheirognomy is
concerned, the-size of the nail can be Rllgx?sed as extending from
its beginnini to the tip of the finger. ils may be classified as
long, short, broad and narrow.

Long Nails. Lonﬁ nails denote weak physical nature. People
with long nails are likely to suffer from cgest and lung troubll;s
esﬁfccilaﬂy if the nails are thin, curved, or, worse still, fluted or
n ed.

Long, thick and curved nails are a sign of cruel nature and
loose morals.

When this kind of nail is shorter, it is indicative of throat
troubles, such as laryngitis, asthma and bronchial troubles.

Long nails, white at the top, and bluish in colour indicate
faulty circulation as a result of ill health or nervous weakness.
Such sign will appear on the hands of women when between the
ages of fourteen and twenty-one, forty-two and forty-seven.

Short Nails. Short nails indicate a tendency to heart dis-
ease. Short, thin and flat at the base with little or no moons,
they are infallible signs of weak action of the heart. Large
moons, if present, indicate good circulation. Short and triangular-
shaped nails, besides being flat and thin, denote a tendency to
paralysis. .

“Short nails, flat and inclined to ciirve out at,the edges, also-
foretell paralysis.

Nails with spots denote a highly-strung nervous tempera-
ment. White spots are a sign of general del 'caci'. Thin nails
of small size show lack of energy and ill health. If narrow and
long with curves, spinal trﬁuble is imminent.

Nails to be ect should be transparent, pink, polished,
not brittle, and of normal length. The possessor is a pp;son of
18 INDIAN PALMISTRY
good spirits, refinement, healthy, natural tastes, and plenty of
tact.

When a deep furrow is found across the nail, it is a mark
that a severe illness has imgaired the nervous system. The date
and time of this illness and strain can be found as follows: if
found at the base, one month; if seen about the centre, four to
five months; if on the edge or outer edge, nine months. Fluted
nails indicate a weakness of the nervous system.

Murks on the Nails. Black spots show grief, sorrow, and
sadness. A starshaped white mark shows a useless worship of
i:hin%’s1 and people, unrequited love, or deception. A white mark
on the thumb nail shows attachment. A black s denotes
crime. A white spot on the nail of the Jupiter er shows
gain, and a black spot denotes loss. A white spot on the nail
of the middle finger foretells a journey, and a black spot denotes
imcﬁendin%lmin. A white spot on the nail of the third finger
indicates honour and wealth, but a black spot dishonour. A
white spot on the nail of the fourth finger indicates success in
science and business ventures; but a black spot indicates failure.
If one has yellow marks on the nails, this is taken as a sign
of prgmature death.

~ Disposition and Nails. Longnailed people are less critical
and more impressionable than those with short nails. They have
a more equa%le temper, and a gentler disposition. They have
more resignation, idealism and a taste for literature, poetry,
painting, and the fine arts. They are inclined to be visionaries.

Short-nailed persons, on the other hand, are critical, and are
apt to analyse everything they come across. They are logical- ¢
minded, and rely on facts. Their brain is more active. ey®
are good debaters, and have a livelier sense of humour than
those with long nails. Their temper is, however, quick and
sharp. When the nails are broader than they are long, they
indicate a quarrelsome nature, tending to meddle in other
people’s affairs.

If a person bites his nails habitually, he is of a nervous and
worrying ternperament.

Nails and Temper. Self-controi and cheerfulness can be
read jrom the rln':iunts Iy &

nger as icated by Nails. nger,ﬂann'%uprom as-
sion, is shovm by the size and shape of the nails. The wider
and shorter the nails, thc more anfer is felt; the longer and
larger the nails, the less auger is felt.

The colour of the nails denotes that anger which is derived
from the nerves. The pinker the nails, the more; the whiter, the
less. This can be improved, if cured, as it is the result of bad
digestion or nerves, A good colour indicates health.

Cheerfulness. If the mount of Mercury is prominent, it gives
a person cheerfulness and hope. He does not easily become
discouraged and despondent. This should be read in conjuno
tion with the characteristics of the nails.
FINGER NAILS 19

S:g-contml. The upper mount of Mars under Mercury,
situated between the lines of Heart and Head, if well-developed

and flat, endows its possessor with self-control and a spirit of

resignation and resistance of evil. The student is advised to

examine this part of the hand to estimate the degree of self-

control. It may be stated that the harder and higher the

mount, the Tﬁreater the control of temper; the longer and softer,

the less. e phalanges of the thumb and their shape should

also be examined.

Vindictiveness. Long-nailed people are quiet-tempered.
They require much provocation to rouse them to passion; and, if
they are, their feelings generally find expression in sarcasm or
quiet revenge. -
CHAPTER IV
THE THUMB AND ITS SECRETS

The Chinese and Hindus have always been believers in the
astrological aspect of hand-reading. The Chinese have a system
of reading and divination by a study of the imf)ression left by
the ball of the thumb pressed on a lump of soft wax. No two
thumbs are absolutely alike and, in the same way, no two hands
can be found whosec shape and lines are identical. “The higher
animal,” says D’Arpentigny, “is revealed in the hand, but the
man is in the thumb.”

The importance of the thumb in relation to the science of
hand-reading has been accepted on all hands. A thumb may be
of any one of the following varieties: stiff, or firm-jointed;
flexible or supple; composite; small; large; low-set; high set.
These are types classified according to shape. A further classifi-
cation is also possible when the zrst two phalanges and their
shape are considered.

Stiff thumb. There are people who possess a thumb, which
bends back only slightly. is connotes strong will, caution and
wariness, secretiveness, steadiness and slow advance towards the
objective. The possessor of such a type has rich commonsense
and self-control. In war he is strong and irresistible; in love,
firm and dogged, but not given to display. If the thumb is
extremely stiff and will not bend back at all, a grasping and
avaricious nature is denoted.

Supple thumb. This bends back easily and shows extrava-
gance in everything, money matters, ideas, plans and adaptability
to all circumstances. The possessor of such a thumb is a born
spendthrift, quite at home in every kind of social setting.

Composite type. This is a combination of the precedin,
two. The top joint is rather thick. showing will-power anc
determination. It bends back a bit. These people can be reso-
lute as well as impulsive. They are likely to feel awkward some-
times, as they are “impulsively determined” (Jaquin).

Small thumb. A thumb may be small, denoting weak cha-
racter and motion, lack of drive and determination. The pos-
sessor is _guided by his heart and sentiments, and is easily
influenced.  He is romantic and is passionately fond of fiction.
He appreciates the bedutiful and sentimental. The thumb of
the French king. Louis XVI, belonged to this type; it will be
recalled that he was beheaded in the Revolution.

« Large thumb. These have been found on the hands of men
of outstanding character, who were ruled by the head rather
than the heart. Cotigt St. Germain says that Galileo, Descartes,
Newton, Leibnitz and Voltaire had large thumbs. The thumbs
of Napoleon and Gladstone were large.
THE THUMB AND ITS SECRETS 21

Low-set thumb. This is one with a wide gap from the base
of the Jupiter finger to the inner root of the thumb. It denotes
great general talent and adaptability. But it is not usual for
such a subject to possess great literary powers. He has the

\capacity to adapt the books of others to his own requirements.
He is an ideal compiler. When a low-set thumb leaves a large
space between itself and the finger® of c{‘upiter, it denotes a
nature abounding in humane qualities, such as generosity, inde-
peadent thon;lglht‘ love of liberty for all, sympathy for all. Thus
the low-set thumb is a “philanthropic”, humane thumb. It is
generally long and large; and, if it is so, it indicates great
qualities associated with eminent, strong character. It is rare.

High-set thumb. A monkey's thumb is placed high at the
side of the paw; also the thumb of an idiot. Thus we reason
that the hig]fer the thumb is placed on the side of the hand, the
lower the grade of intelligence and the less the adaptability of
the subject. The smaller the thumb and the nearer it approaches
to the monkey thumb, the nearer the approach of the subject to
the qualities of the monkey. Monkeys may be bright and
shrewd, but wholly lack “character” (Benham). Mrs. Robinson
in The Graven Pa{m says that high-set th s have as a rule
been found on the hands of novelists, journalists, and writers. In
‘my_opinion, high-set thumbs must have been extremely large
and well-shaped, in such cases, as, otherwise, there would not
have been literary ability and intelligence on the part of their
POSSessors.

Phalanges.  The first phalange denotes a great fund of
will-power, self-reliance, domineering spirit. The second shows
logic, reasoning ability, judgment. The third is the mount of .
Venus, which indicates the passionate nature of the subject.

When reading a hand, it is necessary to ascertain whether
a subject has more will than reasoning power or vice versa. In
a we{l-balanced and excellent character, the two are evenly
balanced. Both must be large and well-developed, if the sub-
ject is to be a leader of men, and possess enougﬁ force to make

is way in life.

First phalange. The first phalange, if broad and larger than
the secom{ denotes strength of will. If shorter it shows weak-
ness of will,Vand if very short, it indicates carelessness and in-
difference. If long, but with square tips, it indicates love of
justice and strong will. In a soft hands this sign loses its force.
If it is of medium length and size, but is broad, it indicates an
obstinate character; but with a square tip, the postessor of sound
judgment is indicated. 5

If very long, broad, and thick, furious impulses and uncon-
trollable temper are denoted. This sign has i)een seen on the
hands of murderers, highwaymen, and cruel parents. These indi-
cations may be modified by: the lines and sighs on the palm. But
they have been generally found correct as prognostications of
misfortune. Such people should be sh .~ Sometimes these
22 INDIAN PALMISTRY

gpes of thumbs assume the shape of clubs, and are known as
ubbed thumbs.’ This is far more dangerous than any describ-
ed hitherto. The strength of the first phalange of the thumb
should be gauged by a close examination of the breadth, thick-
ness and size of the tips: square, spatulated, conical, or pointed.

Second phalange. ,The student should note carefully
the fact that this phalange of the thumb is generally longer than
the first. In very rare hands, the two are found equal; in which
case, reason and will arc fouud to be evenly balanced.

When the first phalange is narrow, flat, and inclined to be
pointed, and very small as compared with the second phalange,
a weak will is denoted. Such people are nervous by nature.

If both the phalanges are small, narrow, and thin, and the
upper one inclined to be conical or pointed at the tip, and to
slope down to greater width at the joint, the subject is obstinate.

If the thumb is of a conical shape at the tip, with the first
phalange long as compared with a narrow second phalange, the
subject is inclined to be diplomatic and tactful.

A full and clumsy second phalange indicates that the sub-
ject has g;oor logical and intellectual powers. It denotes a lower

rain.

L

1 2 3 4
Fic. 5.
THUMB AND ITS SHAPES
1. Supple thumb. 2. Clubbed thumb. 3. Stiff jointed thumb.
4. Elementary thumb.

Sometimes a wasp shaped phalange is seen. It is a sign of
a brilliantly intellectual ‘and tactful person, quick, sharp, and
deep. This subject does everything in a diplomatic way, and
knows how to approach people in the right manner, and to gain
his ends by suitable meuns.
_*_ When the second phalange is long and the first one short,
it is a sign of a good conversationalist as well as a thinker with
excellent reasoning® ability. He is, however, incapable of real
izing his ideals. If the second phalange is short and the first
long, a person who acts without proper forethought is denoted.
THE THUMB AND ITS SECRETS 23

Such a type is prone to judge a situation incorrectly and take
risks, act impulsively, and later repent. ’

Some_observations by ancient Hindu writers. A thumb is
considered to be good, if it is placed high, fully developed, and
round in shape. On the other hand, if it is short, Hlat, and
crooked, it tends to bring misfortune and unhappiness. If a
woman has a wide thumb, it indicates widowhood. If a man
has such a thumb, he faces trouble, and lives a celibate life. A
stgzlfht, round, conical, and soft-looking thumb is considered
g

If the forepart of the thumb touches the second phalange
of the first finger, it is a sign of a person who is an expert in
engineering and the industrial arts, and learned in the sciences,
philosophy, and literature. He is also a stalwart, physically.

If the upper part of the thumb is wide and the lower thin,
it denotes troubles in life. If the upper Ifm is thin and the
lower wide, the subject is quarrelsome. the second part of
the thumb is full, it denotes a widely travelled person. If the
big toe of the feet of a woman is red, she is not held in esteem
by her husband. If the thumb of a woman is somewhat round
in shape, she is the wife of a rich person. If her big toe is
round in shape she is constant in her affections.
CHAPTER V
THE MOUNTS

Mr. Noel Jaquin says: “Mounts are muscular pads. The
student must be careful to observe their correct positions, which
should be beneath each finger. These mounts bear a design
similar in type to the finger tips, and it is only possible to
observe their exact position by noting the position of the apex,
which is the core of centre of the ridge patten. The finger
tips all bear apexes; all the skin’s ridges running in a definite.
pattern to a central point, which may be of circular formation
or triangular, and the mounts of the hand bear the same type
of marking. Therefore, if any of these apexes on the mounts
of the hand are misplaced it indicates that the influence
of the misplaced mount is weakened or overshadowed, by the
indications of the mount to which the misplacement is drawn.”

This indicates what a meunt is, and its strength or other-
wise should be judged by its height, flatness, or thickness. High

and prominent mounts are strong; flat, ordinary mounts with’

a marked depression are weak.
Now a word about what these mounts show in the hand.

Mrs. Katherine St. Hill, an authority on the subject, writes:
“The mounts represent the senses, the natural impulses and
emotions present in the character of a person; and the force

- and intellectual quality of the ideas must be gathered from the
head line and the method of forcing and carrying them out
from the finger” (Book of the Hand).

She compares the fingers to a machine, head and heart
lines to an engine, more or less perfect, according to the way
in which it is made, and the mounts to the forces of fire or
electricity, i.e., the motive force behind the machine. When
the forces are too strong, they wreck the machine and engine.
The senses get too strong for the intellect to govern and rui
fate, when mounts on the hand are high, the lines poor, an
the fingers weak. Character, in short, depends on the stréngth
of the mounts, head and heart lines and the thumb. Mounts,
in other words, represent the senses, passions and feelings, the
natural likes and dislikes. of the subject. Strong mounts without

will-power and commonsense obstruct the success of a person, -

and it is useless to expect any good work from him. It has
been seen that people possessed ot an excellent head line and
a good Mercury finger have failed to achieve arg'dn'ng in the
world, because of the presence of over-developed emotions of
various kinds in thelr character. Asa matter of fact, they are
passive by nature, and they have become mere dreamers, wast-
ing energy in the gratification of the senses. When the mounts
THE MOUNTS 25

are hard, fairly E;ominent and flat, good work can be expected;

_when weak, a kind of depression will be noticed. When the
mounts dominate the head and heart lines, the emotions inter-
fere with the intellect and affectionate disposition of the indi-
vidual, and evil consequences follow. e&lshould not en-
croach upon the centre of the hand, for this points to the
presence of more harmful qualities. *

Fig. 6.
MOUNTS & ZONES ON THE HAND
Mount of Jupiter or Society.
Mount of Saturn with its finger functioning as balance to the
Character.
Mount of Apollo or Art.
Mount of Mercury, hope, cheerfulness or victory.
Mount of lower Mars of aggression & pedagogic instincts & talents.
Plain of Mars, the field of struggles and action.
Mount of upper Mars, of resistance, resignation and courage.
Mount of Moon or imagination. .
Mount of Venus or love, music or family. Its development denotes
«materialistic tone of mind. .

OOND Uh o 1o

Zones. o
Emotional or_intellectual or ideal Zone representeds by Nos. 1, 2, 3,
4 and fingers.

2. Business or practical Zone of being sensible represented by No. 5,
upper half of 8 and 7 as shown by dotted line.

3. Zone of instincts represented by lower half of Nos. 6, 8, 9. .

4 Zone of imagination and sub-Conscious Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8 as shown
34):' the %ﬂed vertical line from betwgen 2nd & 3rd fingers

wn ward. *
5. Spiitual and religious Zone denoted by Nos. 1, 2, 8 and long nail.
Phalange of Jupiter and Saturn fingers.

[
26 INDIAN PALMISTRY

8. Zone of materialistic or wordly tendencies, tendencies denoted by
Nos. 1, 5,.6, 9 as shown by the vertical line.

Height and Elasticity of the Mount. This should be studied,
for upon these two factors rests the force of the subject’s senses
and emotions. . =

The strength or weakness of the mount shou‘fl be read
with the finger under which it is located as in the case of the
mount of Jupiter, Saturn, the Sun, and Mercury, and in accord-
ance with the height, elasticity, and toughness of the mount,
as also the position of the apex. The student should also note
the inclination of the mounts to one another and the straight-
ness of the lines in order to judge their strength and weakness.

The Mount of Jupiter. Mrs. St. Hill calls the mount of
Jupiter the mount of society and, according to her, “it repre-
sents on the hand the instinct of gregariousness, our liking for
our kind, society and its relation to ourselves. It also takes
in_our position in that society, our desires with regard to our
fellow creatures.” It also denotes ambition, love of rule, and
honest pride, religious belief, and a certain amount of self-
assertiveness, together with a fondness for looking important in
the eyes of others, and a disinclination to make new acquain-
tances. The possessor of such a well-developed and shaped
mount is as a rule healthy, handsome, and popular. He is also
anxious to marry early.

Normal Development and Its Indications. When the mount
of Jupiter is normally developed, it endows the subject with
all those qualities of head and heart for which the mount stands.
Such a person will not be vulgar and ostentatious. Xe will
attempt to get all the best things of life. If the index finger
is normal and the marks on the hand are not unfavourable, he
will occupy a good position in life. He will be of a loving
nature, and wiﬁ yo ull out to advance the members of his
family, and would not be moved by unkind and ungenerous
thoughts for others. A Jupiterian is a born leader of men.
honourable, dignified, religious, ambitious, and a magnetic per-
sonality He is likely to become a clergyman, statesman, poli-
tician, diplomatist, school master, or lecturer. When the mount
of Jupiter is abnormally developed and the finger is long, the
subject will be vain, selfish, conceited and tyrannieal. He will
be gluttonqus, and, if the mount is developed, inclined to drink
to excess. He will have poor health, from dyspepsia, conse-
quent on over-eating and rush of blood fo the brain, a disordered
stomach, vertigo, apoplexy, gout, and sometimes lung troubles.

1If the mount is under-developed and the space under the
first finger covered by criss-cross lines, the better qualities of
Jupiter are not in evidence. The subject will not have the
qualities mdicated by this mount. He will lack ambition and
will not take steps fo improve his lot, in life. There will neither
be sense of self-respect nor honourable pride, and he may stag-
nate in his career. There will be elements of laziness, irreligious-
100 INDIAN PALMISTRY

- one simply through ability and extraordinary qualities of the
head. (see Figure 18).

There is another line similar o it but slightly different.
This again rises from the Jupiter, and without touching the Life
line but running very close to it, %oes straight through the palm,
long, deep, evenly traced and well coloured. The characteristics
above described would be denoted, but with the difference that
there would be an element of hastiness, impetuosity of action
and less of tact and diplomacy (see 5-1, Figure 18).

Line of Head Separated from the Line of Life. The third
way of the line of Head taking its rise is when it is seen sepa-
rated from the line of Life. There are cases when the distance
between the two is slight, while in others the distance is wider.
When the space is not very wide (see 6-7 Figure 17) it is an
excellent mark to possess, for such a line endows a person with
an independence of thought, quickness of judgment and a men-
tal and moral courage so very necessary for struggles in life.
People with this formation make a great ‘success; if they under-
take to select a public career, they have the courage to appear
before the public and express themselves with ease. In cases
when this line runs straight to the mount of Mars, it denotes
that the subject would possess the capacity to become a self-.
appointed leader of a public movement. If a person has the
ﬁnﬁer of Mercury long and high set, with the second Eha.lartﬁe
wide, strong and long, and a line of Head rising from the
mount of Jupiter and running straight and long across the palm,
it is a sign of a clever and successful businessman who even if
he is born in a poor family would rise to be a millionaire, espe-
cially when the lines of Fate and Apollo are strong, the former
in some form or other reaching the Jupiter mount. This kind
of mark I noticed on the hands of ~several millionaires and
bankers and business magnates.

When there is a wide space between the lines of Head
and Life, it denotes that the subject is rash, foolhardy and impe-
tuous in all that he does. The elements of prudence and cau-
tion are sadly wanting and he is apt to lack continuity of pur-
pose and action. He is extremely erratic and changeable in
all that he does. His temper is an excitable one, and in the
event of excessive width between the two lines, the brain is
subject to ekcess of flow of blood to it, and mental unbalance
and sleeplessness are the result. These indications become all
the more alarming and serious when the line of Head is
islanded, or broad with breaks and hair lines, for it is an indi-
cation of insanity. Besides, this sign denotes that owing to ex-
citability the subject would have a murderous tendency.

Terminating Points of the Line. If the student masters
the iudications of tke rising and terminating points of this line
he would have a_correct estimate of the mental equipment of
the subject, which is far more important in the making of a
successful career than anything else. We have dealt with the

THE LINE OF HEAD 101

chief indications of the rising points of this line. Now we turn
to deal with what the line shows when it terminates. When "
the line of Head is short and ends abruptly under the mount of
Saturn, it is said to denote a short life.

When it runs to the upper mount of Mars, it shows a re-
sistent and fighting (Ilfuah't)’. Besides the subject fights his way
up, and possesses self-control, and in adverse circumstances he
is resigned to the will of God and faces the world manfully.
This sign is indicative of a common-sense view of life and even
the unfavourable tendencies of a sloping line of Head rising
from the lower mount of Mars are neutralized. Wheun this line
before terminating on this mount turns upwards pointing to the
mount of Mercury, it makes the subject grasping and grabbing.
Such a person becomes a hard taskmaster, and would make
moneymaking his chief aim in life. Besides, it is also a sign
tllg)it l)(l)ve of money would increase with age, (see A-A, Figure

When the line of Head after running straight through the
palm and touching the mount of Mars gently slopes down to the
upper mount of Moon, it denotes that the inventive and imagi-
native faculties and talents of the person are put to practical
use. The business side and acquisitive tendencies though not
*ruled out will be coupled with powers and talents for inven-
tion (see A-B).

The termination of the line of Head on the mount of
Moon makes a person imaginative. If the mount of Moon is
well developed and the finger of Mercury long and well set on
the palm, tﬁe subject will be a poet, artist, literary man and a
scholar of a very high order. esides, the termination of this
line with a beautiful fork endows a person with a taste for lite-
rature and should be considered the mark of a scholar learned
in all the lores of the East and the West.

If this line terminates on the lower mount of Moon and is
associated with either a cross or an island, the subject would
have little mental balance, and may end himself.

When the line of Head in its early course through the hand
sends up branches to the line of Heart, it indicates a thievish
disposition, and parents should watch their children if this sign
is present on their hands. (See A-D, Figure 19).

When this line terminates on the line of Heast or sends a
branch to attack it, it is a sure sign,that the person’s calcula-
tive, grasping and grabbing tendencies would be so much in
evidence that he would lose all mental balance and in his bid
to make money would go any length and even allow himself
to resort to criminal methods.” Such a one would stand in risk
of being convicted. This also shows fixity of purpose for some
purpose in the pursuit of which he may do anything he is cap-
able of (See D-D, Figure 20). e

When the line of Head is very long and ends at the percus-
sion, it is not a favourable sign.
102 INDIAN PALMISTRY

In rare cases the line of Head runs to the lower mount of
Moon. When it does, it gives an excess of imagination.

The line of Head joined at the start with Life and Heart
lines said to indicate sudden death.

When the lines of Head and Heart are seen running toge-
ther as one line, it denotes a very self-concentrated nature. If
in such a person the sentimental and intellectual sides are
united, he would possess greater determination of character and
Eersistence of aim than any other, and as such would use all

is powers of head and heart to achieve that on which his
heart is set. People with this sign have been found to be some-
times successful in life; but it is not a good and happy sign to
have, as the nature of the person militates against iis pulling
on well with people about him. Besides, the position of the
line must be care?'ully noted. If it occupies the place usually
filled by the Heart line, it denotes that the emotional and senti-
mental side of the person would rule; while if the line is found
low down the palm in the place usually occupied by the Head
line, the calculative and intellectual tendencies would have the
upper hand.

Double Lines of Head. Many ancient authorities consider
the double lines of Head when clearly and deeply traced on the
palm as a sign of the inheritance of great wealth or power. But
our experience of reading of hands tells us that this mark may
indicate accession of power and wealth. Even when material
possessions and social position are not inherited, a person with
this sign attains them by virtue of the excellence of his intel-
lect and mental power.

These double lines of Head are seen rising from twao dis-
tinct positions, one rising from the line of Life and the other
higher up trom the mount ot Jupiter. These positions endow
a person with the elements of cautivn, prudence, a go-ahead
spirit and ambition and a large measure of self-confidence, which
will enable him to put his ideas into practical shape. Thus the
result is that an unusual degree of intelligence and mental power
would be present in the individual.

- When the line of Head, after it has covered some distance
on the palm, is split up into two forks, one running straight to
the upper mount of Mars and the other sloping to the mount of
Moon, it denotes a_dual mentality swaving between the imagi-
native and practical sides.

Signs and Marks on the Line of Head

A chained line of Head is a sign of mental weakness con-
sequent on ill health. An islanded linc of Head when it is
widely separated from the line of Life denotes an excessive
irritability of temper which sometimes hecomes uncontrollable,
resulting in explosions. mad and rash acts bordering on murder
and endangering the life of other people. This formation accom-
panied by a slope to the mount of Moon denotes an unusually
melancholic disposition inclining the subject to escape from the
THE LINE OF HEAD 103

LINE OF HEAD

society of his fellowmen, and in some cases he is led to an
act of suicide.

Thre position of the island on the line of Head has a mean-
ing of its own and the student should interpret it accordingly.
As for example, an island under the thirrg finger denotes a
weakness of eyesight and tendency to blindness.

Another point which the student should remember is that
changes in the form of lines rising or dropping from the Head
lines are noted. These branches at first seen as hair lines deve-
lop into well-marked, deep lines and denote practical or imagi-
native tendencies as the lines are straight or sloping. A care-
ful examination of these lines will reveal the tendencies, prac-
tical or otherwise, of the subject at the date the lines are seen
on the hand. O

When at the close, a fine branch of a straight line of Head
slopes down to the mount of Moon and the lines of Fate and
Sun are found of good strength denoting Frosperous existence,
it denotes that after the stress and strain of a busy professional,
official or business career involving use of practical talent, the
subject would be inclined more and more, as the years roll by,
to a cultivation of the imaginative and philosophical side of his
mentality.
104 INDIAN PALMISTRY

Sign of Cross and Square and Line of Head. A cross is an
unfavourable sign, and if found on any part of the Head line, it
indicates injury to the brain. If found under Jupiter, the injury
would be caused as the result of his being proud and dogma-
tic. Its presence on this line under Saturn denotes that the
injuries would be caused by animals, explosions and blows of
a treacherous nature. Its position under Sun indicates injury to
the head consequent on sudden falls. If this cross is situated
under Mercury, it denotes acident due to scientific pursuits
or experiments of some business of a risky type.

Squares are marks of preservation and when found on any
mount or line, they indicate that the person would escape dis-
aster. When found on the line of Head, unfavourable signs
enclosed by it would lose all their intensity of mischief.

A break in the line of Head indicates an accident to the
head and if found under Saturn might end in death of the
subject.

The student is advised to keep in mind the indications of
the thumb and tips of ﬁnﬁers when reading the line of Head.
A supple, conic-tipped thumb, conical and pointed fingers,
indicating impressionability, .impulsiveness and emotionalism,
may be controlled if a straight line of Head, clear-cut and finely,
traced, rules the hand. In such a case, prudence, common
sense, and level headedness will act as a Eahncing wheel to
the natural inclinations of the subject. On the other hand, if
there is a sloping line of Head indicating imagination, and is
coupled with a strong, stiff thumb or square or spatulate fingers,
the subject would have his imaginative faculties and tendencies
controlled and put to practical account. A subject with these
signs may possess inventive and creative talents of a high order
if the mount of Moon is well developed and the percussion has
a definite creative curve and is seen bulging out.

Other Indications. When the Head line sends up branches
to the mount of Jupiter, it indicates success in all undertakings.
This is the sign of a born ruler of men. If one of these ends
in a star on the same mount, it is a mark of unusual, unexpected
success and good fortune in the form of an accession to social
position, scholastic success, wealth, conferment of honours. In
the same way, branches from this line to the other mounts
should be interpreted as partaking of the qualities indicated by
the mounts. .

When a branch from the linc of Head ascends toward the
line of Heart, it denotes that the person would have a love
affair, in the pursuit of which he would be careless and take
all sorts of risks.

Signs on the Line of Head. A white spot on the line is
considered a sign*of success in the intellectual and literary
sphere. .

A dark spot indicates a tendency to brain fever.
THE LINE OF HEAD 105

When it has a bluish spot and is irreguiar and weak-look-
ing, it indicates a disorder of the liver.

A star on the line is not a good sign and indicates a wound
on the head. When this star is found conjoined with the line
of Health, it is sign of weakness of the sexual organs of women
and is a mark of sterility."

A 1ed spot especially when found under the mount of
Saturn indicates injury to the head.

Blindness is indicated when there is a circle on the line
and a cross high upon on the line of Health.

Line of Head and Hindu Writers. The line of Head is

called by the Hindu writers as the line indicating wealth and
material possessions. It is also called the line of mother, Dhan
Rekha and Viagra Vilas Lila Rekha, ie., a line denoting that
the subject would have a lion’s share in the gratification of his
desires and would lead a life of luxury and comfort. If a sub-
ject is fortunate he must have the lines of Lite, Head and Heart
vegr clearly and deeply traced on the palm, and in their natural
and good positions, as also the four kinds of lines of Fate or
Urdh Rekhas, starting from the wrist and ascending to the base
of all the four fingers. Besides, the line of Knowledge which
.descends from the base of the third to the palm below should
also be present. But an examination of hundreds of bands has
revealed that all these eight lines are rarely found on a hand,
and that is why the bulk of the p%ﬂulation of the world is
steeped in é)overty and misery. e more social progress
comes in and the more prosperous the people become, the more
the hands would be found marked with the favourable lines
referred to above.

The line of Head or the line of mother or wealth is a very )

important line. It is of eighteen kinds, and it is believed by
the Hindu writers that the month of birth of a person can
be found out by a correct reading of these types.

If it is beautiful, thick, unbroken, uncrossed by any other
line, well-coloured, with no unfavourable signs present on it,
and deeply and clearly traced, it denotes that the subject
have material possessions, worldly prosperity and the supreme
happiness of seeing his mother living to a fairly advanced age.

(1) If it is unbroken and of proper thickness, it is called
the line of Mirag Gate and denotes that the person is fortunate
and happy and possessed of good ideds.

(2) It is called the line of Nagi when it is not good and
favourable.

(3) It is called Viratka when it appears to rise in its right
course. This is a sign of poverty.

(4) It is called Kumukhi when at its termination it is con-
necte; with other lines. .This kind of liie denotes that there
would be unfavourable results like the loss of wealth and pos-
sessions and one’s mother, and a weak mental power.
106 INDIAN PAIMISTRY

(5) When at its start it is joined to some other line it is
called Kristina Kacha. The loss of mother and a life of poverty
are indicated.

(6) When it appears to lift up on the left course it is
called Subadhr Dehi. This is regarded good and favourable.

(7) If the line is unbroken and bends upwards in its mid-
dle course through the palm and later on appears beautiful
and straight it is called Pansuli. This is the sign of a person
who is drawn to the other sex and is licentious. This line gives
ordinary results.

(8) If the line while running from the start to the middle
course is seen rising upwards and further on bends down to
the end, it is called Virat Bhuti. This is the sign of a rich man,
well honoured and respected in society.

(9) If at the start and termination it is connected with
other lines, it is called Ananti and denotes unfavourable vibra-
tion.

(10) 1If at che start the line is broken it is cailed Bansu
Dharani. The subject would be shortlived.

(11) If it is broken at its termination, it is called Brahante
Mati. It shows that the subject would have a doubting mind
and weakness in mental order.

(12) If it is broken in the middle, it is called Sushilvati.

(13) If it is broken at its start, centre and termination, it
is called Nikrisht. This is dn unfavourable sign and shows that
the subject would be poor and lead a troubled life of poverty.

(14) If at its start it is united with a mole it is called
Saropuati.

(15) If at its termination, it has a mole it is called Turangi.

(16) If at its centre it has a mole, it is called Matungi.

(17) If at all the threec places il has a muale, it is Sayunji.

(18) It is also named as Sari-bhumi. The lines Nos. 14th
to 18th are very favourable, and if found on the hand of a
person denotes that the sub{ect would be rich, and would
occupy a good and high social position and fill some high post
of responsﬁaility and power in the state. He would be wise.

THE LINE OF DESTINY OR FATE

Cheiro. the celebrated British palnist and seer says in his
book, Palmistry For All, “In my own long experience I could
not help but remark the intimate relation between the effect
of these great planets of our universe and humanity in general.”
In another place in the same work he remarks:

“That some of the greatest teachers and ﬁhilosophers have
come to the conclusion that fate exists for all. Our soul is a
part of the universal soul which knows all things and
the instrumentality of the brain writes its knowledge of the
future in advance upon the hand. Besides there is nothing in
THE LINE OF +FATE 107

this world of ours which is left to blind chance, and All Know-.
ing and All Seeing Providence through the mysterious laws of
destiny shapes our ends.”

Satum in astrology is associated with fate. He is the
bringer ot evil, the power that precipitates in this life the result
of deeds and thoughts of our past life, Besides, our fate is
represented by the planets Saturn and Mars, and lines, i.e., the
lines of Destiny or Saturn, worry lines coming from the mount
of Mars inside the line of Life, indicate how we are to undergo
sufferings as a result of deeds in our previous birth. The evolu-
tion of the soul is denoted by Moon, and on the hand can be
seen the strength and weakness ot the mount of Moon which
is the seat of imagination. Unless the strength of Saturn, the
outermost ring of limitation in our life, is broken, the soul can-
not express to the full its gains from previous lives, and libera-
tion from the cycle of births and death is not possible.

We have seen how the lines of Life, Head and Heart
show the strength or otherwise of the physical vitality, intelli-
gence and emotions that we possess. The line of destiny or
Saturn is the line which denotes the road of destiny on which
a human being travels. This lige is rarely found on elemen-
tary bands, the hands of labourers and people whose interests
are bound up with the passing hour. Besides, this line is not
sometimes seen on the ]hands of very rich people who never
have to worry about their daily life, of those very selfish people
of so phlegmatic a nature that they remain absorbed in their
own hereditary conditions and environments. Students make
Ereat mistakes in judging the fortune and destiny of a person

v only examining the line of Fate which, if found long and
well marked. is supposed to confer great wealth, social position
and rank on the possessor. The fact of the matter is that a
mere possession ofp this line does not mean that the subject will
be wealthy and successful in life; for I have seen people with
long line of Fate occupying unenviable and low positions in
life, and some of them were found to be extremely poor and
unfortunate; but most of them in spite of failure to achieve
anything had a feeling of self-satisfaction, and did not appear
to worry in the least how they led their life, provided they got
their bread and butter ali right. In such cases, the hands were
invariably found to be unbalanced. The fingers, .thumb and
mounts were not norally developed, and the subjects were
handicapped by intellectual, emotional and physical defects.

“The possessor of a long line of Fate”, says Mrs. St. Hill,
“is always under the rule of circumstances, heredity and of his
own character. His career is before Him. He can make it
good or bad. The road is there and along it he goes. This is
of conrse if the line is long in both hands. If it is long in one
and broken in the other, there will be !sfrugg]es agrinst cir-
cumstances. To have a long line all crossed and barred is a
greater misfortune than to have no line at all, except in the
108 INDIAN PALMISTRY

case of a very strong and peculiar character. To be born under
high’ and peculiar circumstances and to be gifted with sufficient
intelligence to be acutely sensible of the fact is far more unfor-
tunate than to be born to an insignificant existence with an un-
impressionable temperament, taking little account of circum-
stances, without ambition and contented with the comronplace.”
The above observations are quite correct. Possessors of a long
Fate line are under the influence of Saturn and if this line is
crossed and barred. the malignant influence of Mars is added to
that ot Saturn, the dispenser of tate, and in this case the com-
bined influence ot Mars and Saturn makes man undergo suffer-
ings and tribulations and take part in struggles and strifes; and by
the time the end comes, the destiny is fulfilled. An examination
of the line of Fate has revealed the fact that if Saturn the
planet of fate is not favourable to a person, the line of Destiny
even if long would be crossed and barred by lines from Mars,
or be wavy and crooked. Besides, in such cases it has also been
seen to rise from the plain of Mars thus establishing an inti-
mate relation between Mars and Saturn.  These formations
point to the fact that not until the 36th year is passed would the
subject have his affairs straight, and Ke would have to fight
toughly against circumstances. His life up to that time would
be colourless, and there would hardly be any appreciation or
recognition of the work done and the career adopted by him.
The line of Fate even if long and straight, unless reinforced
by the line of Sun, does not promise success and prosperity
and denotes that life would be commonplace, fatalistic, full of
sufferings, sorrow and obscurity. As a matter of fact such peo-
ple are born in the world to reap the fruits of actions in the
previous incarnations.

In order to judge aright how far a good line of Fate would
promise wealth, honour, rank and social position to the subject,
the student should bear in mind the following facts, which if
not considered are very likely to create a wrong impression
regarding the indications of a clear, unbroken and strong line
of Destiny :

(1) the palm should be evenly balanced with no -distinct
and marked hollowness.

(2) the fingers should be normally developed, and straight
and long, set evenly and in a line on the palm with mounts
underneath well-developtd so as not to cause a slope inclined
either towards the side of the mount of Mercury or the mount
of Jupiter. i

(38) The line of Head shonld be evenly traced, long and
deep, and should rise from the mount of Jupiter, and slightly
touching the Life line sweep through the middle of the
to the percussion. * - .

(4) The thumb should show strength of will and healthy
reasoning powers.
THE LINE OF FATE 109

(5) A line ot S;ln without which no success worth the name
can be predicted should also be present.

The line of Fate is one of the most important of the
principal lines of the hand, and denote the main events of the
career of a person, changes, successes or failures and possibilities
of the future. On the left hand, it indicates the ideas, opinions
and the inner life and in the right it denotes the facts connected
with our outward and active i’fe. Mirs. St. Hill thinks that a
change of a profession should be read in the right, and that of
religion in the left. To be favourable, it should be deep, evenly
and clearly traced, straight and not wavy. It should have
branches running up to the bases of the fingers of Mercury,
Sun and Jupiter. A branchless line of Fate even if long and
strong should not be considered a good line at all. Tt is found
on the bands of a person who goes to his doom; and it would
be extremely hard for him to avoid tragic events in his career.
Nothing wilY ever happen in his life but to cause him suffering;
and he would stand alone with none to help him. The line,
if short, denotes a short career; if broken, a change in the
career; if crooked, an evil life; if barred by cross lines, trouble
and difficulties; if islanded, weak financial circumstances; and
(if starred, an accident. Besides this line should be read in con-
nection with the parts of the hand it runs over.

The line of Destiny has been tound to rise from the following
distinct positions : — R

1. From and out of the line of Life.

2. From the wrist.

3. From the plain of Mars.

4. From the mount of Moon.

1. Rising from the Line of Life (See A-B, Fig. 21). When
the line of Fate rises from the line of Life, it denotes a Life
dominhated in earlier years by home influences. The possessor
of such a line would not be able to start life independently and
would have to face dfficulties and hard struggles. In spite of
talents and hard work, he would fail to receive recognition and
reward for his work. Besides, he would be neglected, set upon
and definitely discouraged, so that his life would be obscure
right up to the time the Fate line leaves the Life line. This year
would be very important in his career; for it would be from this
time that his career would become sifccessful, provided his line
of Fate after this year is well traced, deep and unbroken, run-
ning to the mount of Saturn and ending there and in its course
sensing branches to other mounts. There is another point worth
noting and it is that the possessors of such a line cannot break
"away from their family, and wherever they might go and live,
their interests would be bound up with the éamily to which the;
belong, Since this kind of line of Fate in its early course throu
the palm is the same as the line of Life, it denotes that the
subject would have all the advantages and disadvantages conse-
110 INDIAN PALMISTRY

quent on the family environment in which he was born. If he
belongs to a rich, family he would lead a comfortable life; but
there would hardly be any personal success. If he is born in a
r family, his early years will be cramped and difficult, and
e would have to struggle hard to make his career. These indi-
cations regarding his Fate line can oily be explained when we
bear in mind the fact that ancient Hindu authors on palmistry
called the line of Life the line of father, family or race. There-
fore if in the hand we see the lines of Fate coinciding with the
line of Life from the wrist onward, and running up as one line,
we should interpret this sign to mean that up to the time the
line of Destiny seems to run on with the line of Life (as shown
in ZAB, Figure 21) the subject’s life would be entircly ruled by
the social and financial status of the family in which he or she
has been born. The life as remarked by some writers on the
subject need not be hard and cramped in all cases. It has been
seen that Eoor people are handica{)ped and depressed because of
their weak financial position, while on the other hand, subjects
born in richer and more prosperous conditions lead an extremely
comfortable life and have not to worry in the least; but it is a
fact that their career is not independent and there is no personal
success worth the name. Even after their independent career
is started, they are financed by their parents or receive financial
help from the property or bank balances of their family.

LINE OF FATE AND ITS STARTING PLACES
THE LINE OF FATE 111

When the line of Fate rises from inside the line of Life (C D,
Figure 21) it means that the life would be swayed by passion and
the destiny would be affected by love of the opposite sex in a
most unfavourable way.

2. Rising from the Wrist (E—F): Rising from the wrist
the line of Destiny denotes‘that the subject would take up an
early responsibility and would be free tp select arid chalk out a
career of his own without allowing himself to be dominated and
influenced by his parents so far as the choice of the career is
concerned. If this line is straight, deep, clearly and evenly
traced and long and runs in a faultless form to the mount of
Saturn, throwing branches to the other mounts, and supported
and accompanied by the line of Sun, it promises extremely good
fortune, brilliant success and attainment of high social position
and acquisition of wealth. This is the most favourable form of
the line of Destiny. This kind of line becomes unfavourable
and indicates grief when it rises from below the rascette.

8. Rising from the Mount of Moon. When the line of
Fate rises from the mount of Moon, the destiny is influenced by
the changeable character of the planet moon. ~The fate is more
eventful and capricious and depends on the caprices and fancy
of other people. G
*  When it joins the line of Heart, it denotes a happy and
prosperous marriage consequent on some romantic love affair,
People with this kind of Fate line and fingers have been found
to be gifted with intuitive powers. When the line of Fate is
seen straight in the hand running to the mount of Saturn with a
line coming from the mount of Moon and joining it, it denotes
that the subject would be helped and pushed up in life by a
person from outside, and it is generally regarded that it refers
to a person of the other sex (R-M, Figure 21).

‘hen such a line cuts the line of Fate and runs upwards
towards the mount of Jupiter, it shows that the person whom
this line represents would use the subject for his personal gains,
and then when his object had been achieved he would with-
draw. Such a sign has been seen on the hands of women (O P,
Figure 21).

When a line from Moon travels bi the line of Fate, it
represents a healthy influence through which the subject would
be aided in life. .

People with Fate lines from Moon have personal magne-
tism, easily become public favourites ahd achieve good success
in professions wherein they have a chance to come into contact
Witel people. ’

4. Rising from the Plain of Mars (R R, Fig. 22). When the
line of Fate rises from the plain of Mars, a very hard life is
indicated. Up to the time there is no Fate line on the hand,
the subject leads a negative existence and *remains unknown.
With the appearance of the Fate line, provided it is strong
and well marked and ends on its mount, i.e., Saturn, the circum-
112 INDIAN PALMISTRY

stances begin to change, and in accordance with the nature of
the line, the life led is good or bad. From the very fact that
the line of Destiny starts from the plain of Mars and ends on
Saturn, a relation between Saturn and Mars is established. This

Fic. 22,
LINE OF FATE

means that the subject would have to struggle hard to win suc-
cess in life, and these sufferings ‘are accentuated when the
line of Fate is crossed by worry lines and there are defnite
THE LINE OF FATE 113

marks of opposition’ or strife. But if this line is uncrossed and
well marked and reaches the mount of Satarn and becomes
branched and supported by a line of Sun, success is attained.

Branches of the Line of Fgte. A branchless and heavily
marked line of Fate is not a favourable sign to have. The best
line of Fate is one that is deeply, clearly and evenly traced on
the Ealm and reaches the mount of Safurn and sends branches
to the mounts of Mercury, Sun and Jupiter. Sometimes, the
line of Fate instead of ending on its own, i.c., the Saturn mount
ends on the Mount of Mercury or Sun or }{u iter. It then par-
takes of the qualities of the mount to which it runs. As for
example, if the line bends towards the mount of Jupiter, the
subject would occupy a post of power and responsiblity or
pursue a prominent business career; if it goes towards sun, a
prominent public life or success in art, sculpture, painting or
money making is indicated; if it goes to the mount of Mer-
cury it is the mark of a prominent scientist and business man
of great shrewdness.

The branches from the line of Fate running to the mounts
of Jupiter, Sun or Mercury are very favourable to the possessor.
If the branch reaches the mount of Jupiter, it denotes that the
ambitions would be realised, and‘the possessor would occup
a post of responsibility and power, and he would attain a_hi;
social position. This is a splendid sign to have (See 1—2, No. %I,
Fig. 22).

If the branch runs towards the mount of Sun, success
would be won in the direction of public life and wealth, and
it would bring great fame. This is a magnificent mark of success.
If the branch goes towards Mercury, it denotes that the subject
would win success in science or commerce. (M N & G H, No. 11,
Fig. 22).

When the line of Fate passing over the mount of Saturn
ascends up into the base of the finger, it is a very unfavourable
sign to possess, as the subject would attempt too much and he
would fail to achieve his purpose.

The line of Destiny stopped by the line of Head denotes
that the subject would ruin Ii)is career by some mental mis-
calculation or foolishness. Again when this line is stopped by
the line of Heart, affections misplaced would ruin the career.
But when this Fate line becomes merged in the Heart line and
together in a clear form they Eo up to the mount of Jupiter,
the highest ambitions of the subject Would be realised through
the affections. He will be helped throughout by the friendship
and love of the people he comes across.

Rising from the line of Head, a well marked line of destiny
denotes success achieved through the mental ability of the
person.

A shadowy line of Déstiny, and the one made up of little
bits, indicates that the life would not be successful.
114 INDIAN PALMISTRY

A break in the Fate line means change; but the change
would not be troublesome and unfortunate if the line begins
before the other ends. If the line after the break is strong in
its course, it shows that the position would advance. (See BB,
CC, DD, No. 1V, Fig. 22).

Termination of the Line of Destiny. The line of destiny
ending on the mount of Saturn indicate a good fate, on the
mount of Jupiter a celebrated and prominent career, on the
mount of Sun wealth or fame or both, and on the Mercury
mount a prominent business or scientific career. The line, if
stop‘)ing at the line of Head, means a fatal false judgment; if
on the line of Heart disappointment in the affections and the
ruining of the career through love. Such a sign sometimes in-
dicates death from heart failure. (No. N., III See Fig. 22)

Influence Lines. A small line coming from the mount of
Moon and erging into the line of Fate (See GH No. V, Fig.
22) denotes marriage at the date when this joins the Fate line.
But it the line does not join, marriage may not take place; and
if it is seen running side by side, the influence and love would
be present in the life. This kind of line of influence when cut-
ting the line of Fate and crossing over to the mount of Mars
indicates that the love would change to hate to the great detri-
ment of the career of the persan on whose hand the sign is
present.

Double Line of Fate. On certain hands double lines of Fate
have been found. Sometimes even more than two lines are
found running up side by side. These lines of Fate, if they
run to different mounts, indicate that the two or more kinds
of careers would run simultaneously. Of these one or more
may be either hobbies or side lines, and the strongest and
longest of them may denote the principal career.

When no line of Fate is secen in the hund. and the line of
Head is strong and clear, success is likely to be achieved by the
intellectual ability of the person; but if the lines of Head and
thumb are weak. the life led would be very ordinary, and there
would he nothing to brighten up the existence. In all these
cases, it would not be possible to name the events of life.

Signs and Marks on the Line. A star is a bad sign to be
found on the line of Fate. It blasts the carcer. and indicates
that a rich ‘man would be reduced to poverty and great shock
and trouble would come to him.

A square is a sign of preservation from trouble and danger
and points to the fact that the possessor does some work which
is perilous but would be saved from accident or danger (See
No. 1, Figure 22).

An island on the line of Fate is an unfavourable sign. It
denotes financial difficulties and folly and cheating caused b
the influence of a person who is unrighteously connected with
the possessor. Hence it is interprete§ to mean an illicit con-
116 INDIAN PALMISTRY

(1) If the line of Fate starﬁnﬁ from the wrist ascends
towards the thumb, it indicates a ruling prince.

(2) When this line goes up towards the first finger it shows
that the person is either a prince or a minister.

(3) When this line goes up towards the second finger, it
denotes a person who is a very famous leader and is some-
times a general of the army.

(4) When it goes up towards the third finger it is the
sign of a wealthy man with horses and carriages. He is also
a national leader.

(5) When this line ascends up the palm towards the little
finger, the person is a big man, very much honoured and res-
pected in every department of life.

If this Fate line goes towards all the four fingers, the sub-
ject would enjoy all sorts of happiness, and occupy a high
administrative post in civil and army departments. He is a
very fortunate person.

The line of Fate is also called line of honour and
knowledge.

If this line is unbroken, faultless, well-coloured and marked,
it indicates all that has been given above. Besides, it makes a

erson learned and honoured and enables him to clothe and
‘eed hundreds of human beings.

In a verse it has been stated that if on the palm of a per-
son, three lines are found going up towards the fingers from
the side of the wrist, it is the sign of a prince or Raja who
enjoys benefits of material possessions, social position and all
that a human being can desire to possess. So much has been
stated by the ancient writers of the verse. But I would advise
the student to interpret the word Raja in a broad sense. The
three or more vertical or Urdh Rekhas lines may be tound on
the hands of persons who are not ruling princes, but who are
not less than princes in point of wealth, social position, intel-
lectual attainments and other facts indicative of celebrities in
social, political and religious fields. These lines, 1 am sure, were
present on the hands of ancient leaders and men and are sure
todbe found on the hands of all famous and top ranking leaders
today.
120 INDIAN PALMISTRY

cases people of the opposite sex. Great and distinguished peo-
ple have this line. The sign also shows accession to fortune
through business or work connected with countries overseas.
Moon rules water and success comes to a person through sea
voyages. It also points to the fact that the subject may inherit
social position. e mark is found on the hands of export and
import business men, bayristers, medical men, political leaders.
When the line of Head is well marked and sloping to the

44

2) F1c. 23. 3)
LINE OF SUN AND ITS FORMS
mount of Moo, it is a sign indicating great success in litera-
ture, painling and poetry. ,
Starting from inside the triangle or the plain of Mars and
ascending to the mount of Sun in a faultless condition, it indi-
LINE OF SUN 123
.

If a good line of Success is accompanied by two deep pa-
rallel lines on either side of it, untolg wealth and fame are
denoted (See No. 4, Fig. 23).

If there are lines seen running alongside the line of Sun
without touching it, legacies are denoted.

If such a line comes from the mount of Venus and runs
by the Sun line, legacy coming through a relative is indicated.
When the Head line has an upward curve, coupled with a long
line of Sun, it indicates great love of social position and wealth.
On a long, narrow hand and a prominently hollow palm, this
line loses all its importance, as such a hand is lacking in energy
and hard work.

Hindu View and the Line of Sun. The Urdh Rekha or
Vertical line which terminates at the base of the third finger is
also called Dharm Rekha or line of righteousness and denotes
wealth, position and material possessions.

If this line is long, it is a sign of wealth. If it is broken
or crossed or barred by any other line, it indicates loss of money
and is the mark of a poor man.

When it starts from the mount of Sun and is deeper there
than elsewhere, it denotes that jt is the line of learning or
knowledge and shows that the person is learned. The mount
of Sun has been called by Hindu writers as Vidya Sthan or the
place of learning and knowledge.
